Project Gutenberg’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, by Ludwig Wittgenstein
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.
Title: Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
Author: Ludwig Wittgenstein
Contributor: Bertrand Russell
Translator: C. K. Ogden
Release Date: October 22, 2010 [eBook #5740]
Revised: December 13, 2021
Language: German
Character set encoding: UTF-8
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS ***

Produced by Jana Srna, Norbert H. Langkau, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
Revised by Richard Tonsing
TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE
The original publication was a parallel translation; after the introduction,
even pages contained the German original, odd pages the English translation.
This e-book has been reformatted to contain the English translation (cid:28)rst and
the German original after that. In the PDF (cid:28)le, the proposition numbers are
linked back and forth between the languages.
The original used a lower-case ‘v’ for the logical or operator; it has been
replaced with the correct ‘∨’ character.
In the German part of the original, variables were printed upright; they
have been italicised in this e-book.
Every e(cid:27)ort has been made to replicate the original text as faithfully as
possible. Minor typesetting errors have been corrected; all changes are detailed
in the LATEX source code.

International Library of Psychology
Philosophy and Scienti(cid:28)c Method
General Editor: C. K. Ogden, m.a.
(Magdalene College, Cambridge)



Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus
By
LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
With an Introduction by
BERTRAND RUSSELL, F.R.S.
LONDON
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., LTD.
NEW YORK: HARCOURT, BRACE & COMPANY, INC.
1922

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE EDINBURGH PRESS,
9 AND 11 YOUNG STREET, EDINBURGH.

NOTE
In rendering Mr Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus avail-
able for English readers, the somewhat unusual course has been adopted
of printing the original side by side with the translation. Such a method
of presentation seemed desirable both on account of the obvious di(cid:30)cul-
ties raised by the vocabulary and in view of the peculiar literary character
of the whole. As a result, a certain latitude has been possible in passages
to which objection might otherwise be taken as over-literal.
The proofs of the translation and the version of the original which
appeared in the (cid:28)nal number of Ostwald’s Annalen der Naturphilosophie
(1921) have been very carefully revised by the author himself; and the
Editor further desires to express his indebtedness to Mr F. P. Ramsey, of
Trinity College, Cambridge, for assistance both with the translation and
in the preparation of the book for the press.
C. K. O.



INTRODUCTION
By BERTRAND RUSSELL
Mr Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, whether or
not it prove to give the ultimate truth on the matters with which it deals,
certainly deserves, by its breadth and scope and profundity, to be con-
sidered an important event in the philosophical world. Starting from the
principles of Symbolism and the relations which are necessary between
words and things in any language, it applies the result of this inquiry to
various departments of traditional philosophy, showing in each case how
traditional philosophy and traditional solutions arise out of ignorance of
the principles of Symbolism and out of misuse of language.
The logical structure of propositions and the nature of logical in-
ference are (cid:28)rst dealt with. Thence we pass successively to Theory of
Knowledge, Principles of Physics, Ethics, and (cid:28)nally the Mystical (das
Mystische).
In order to understand Mr Wittgenstein’s book, it is necessary to re-
alize what is the problem with which he is concerned. In the part of his
theory which deals with Symbolism he is concerned with the conditions
which would have to be ful(cid:28)lled by a logically perfect language. There are
various problems as regards language. First, there is the problem what
actually occurs in our minds when we use language with the intention
of meaning something by it; this problem belongs to psychology. Sec-
ondly, there is the problem as to what is the relation subsisting between
thoughts, words, or sentences, and that which they refer to or mean; this
problem belongs to epistemology. Thirdly, there is the problem of using
sentences so as to convey truth rather than falsehood; this belongs to
the special sciences dealing with the subject-matter of the sentences in
question. Fourthly, there is the question: what relation must one fact
(such as a sentence) have to another in order to be capable of being a
symbol for that other? This last is a logical question, and is the one with
which Mr Wittgenstein is concerned. He is concerned with the conditions
for accurate Symbolism, i.e. for Symbolism in which a sentence (cid:16)means(cid:17)
something quite de(cid:28)nite. In practice, language is always more or less
vague, so that what we assert is never quite precise. Thus, logic has two
problems to deal with in regard to Symbolism: (1) the conditions for
sense rather than nonsense in combinations of symbols; (2) the condi-
tions for uniqueness of meaning or reference in symbols or combinations
7

INTRODUCTION
of symbols. A logically perfect language has rules of syntax which pre-
vent nonsense, and has single symbols which always have a de(cid:28)nite and
unique meaning. Mr Wittgenstein is concerned with the conditions for a
logically perfect language(cid:22)not that any language is logically perfect, or
that we believe ourselves capable, here and now, of constructing a logi-
cally perfect language, but that the whole function of language is to have
meaning, and it only ful(cid:28)ls this function in proportion as it approaches
to the ideal language which we postulate.
The essential business of language is to assert or deny facts. Given the
syntax of a language, the meaning of a sentence is determinate as soon
as the meaning of the component words is known. In order that a certain
sentence should assert a certain fact there must, however the language
may be constructed, be something in common between the structure of
the sentence and the structure of the fact. This is perhaps the most
fundamental thesis of Mr Wittgenstein’s theory. That which has to be
in common between the sentence and the fact cannot, so he contends,
be itself in turn said in language. It can, in his phraseology, only be
shown, not said, for whatever we may say will still need to have the same
structure.
The (cid:28)rst requisite of an ideal language would be that there should be
one name for every simple, and never the same name for two di(cid:27)erent
simples. A name is a simple symbol in the sense that it has no parts
which are themselves symbols. In a logically perfect language nothing
that is not simple will have a simple symbol. The symbol for the whole
will be a (cid:16)complex,(cid:17) containing the symbols for the parts. In speaking
of a (cid:16)complex(cid:17) we are, as will appear later, sinning against the rules
of philosophical grammar, but this is unavoidable at the outset. (cid:16)Most
propositions and questions that have been written about philosophical
matters are not false but senseless. We cannot, therefore, answer ques-
tions of this kind at all, but only state their senselessness. Most questions
and propositions of the philosophers result from the fact that we do not
understand the logic of our language. They are of the same kind as the
question whether the Good is more or less identical than the Beautiful(cid:17)
(4.003). What is complex in the world is a fact. Facts which are not
compounded of other facts are what Mr Wittgenstein calls Sachverhalte,
whereas a fact which may consist of two or more facts is called a Tatsa-
che: thus, for example, (cid:16)Socrates is wise(cid:17) is a Sachverhalt, as well as a
Tatsache, whereas (cid:16)Socrates is wise and Plato is his pupil(cid:17) is a Tatsache
but not a Sachverhalt.
8

INTRODUCTION
He compares linguistic expression to projection in geometry. A geo-
metrical (cid:28)gure may be projected in many ways: each of these ways corre-
sponds to a di(cid:27)erent language, but the projective properties of the orig-
inal (cid:28)gure remain unchanged whichever of these ways may be adopted.
These projective properties correspond to that which in his theory the
proposition and the fact must have in common, if the proposition is to
assert the fact.
In certain elementary ways this is, of course, obvious. It is impossible,
for example, to make a statement about two men (assuming for the mo-
ment that the men may be treated as simples), without employing two
names, and if you are going to assert a relation between the two men it
will be necessary that the sentence in which you make the assertion shall
establish a relation between the two names. If we say (cid:16)Plato loves Soc-
rates,(cid:17) the word (cid:16)loves(cid:17) which occurs between the word (cid:16)Plato(cid:17) and the
word (cid:16)Socrates(cid:17) establishes a certain relation between these two words,
and it is owing to this fact that our sentence is able to assert a relation
between the person’s name by the words (cid:16)Plato(cid:17) and (cid:16)Socrates.(cid:17) (cid:16)We
must not say, the complex sign ‘aRb’ says ‘a stands in a certain relation
R to b’; but we must say, that ‘a’ stands in a certain relation to ‘b’ says
that aRb(cid:17) (3.1432).
Mr Wittgenstein begins his theory of Symbolism with the statement
(2.1): (cid:16)We make to ourselves pictures of facts.(cid:17) A picture, he says, is
a model of the reality, and to the objects in the reality correspond the
elements of the picture: the picture itself is a fact. The fact that things
have a certain relation to each other is represented by the fact that in
the picture its elements have a certain relation to one another. (cid:16)In the
picture and the pictured there must be something identical in order that
the one can be a picture of the other at all. What the picture must
have in common with reality in order to be able to represent it after its
manner(cid:22)rightly or falsely(cid:22)is its form of representation(cid:17) (2.161, 2.17).
We speak of a logical picture of a reality when we wish to imply only
so much resemblance as is essential to its being a picture in any sense,
that is to say, when we wish to imply no more than identity of logical
form. The logical picture of a fact, he says, is a Gedanke. A picture
can correspond or not correspond with the fact and be accordingly true
or false, but in both cases it shares the logical form with the fact. The
sense in which he speaks of pictures is illustrated by his statement: (cid:16)The
gramophone record, the musical thought, the score, the waves of sound,
all stand to one another in that pictorial internal relation which holds
9

INTRODUCTION
between language and the world. To all of them the logical structure is
common. (Like the two youths, their two horses and their lilies in the
story. They are all in a certain sense one)(cid:17) (4.014). The possibility of a
proposition representing a fact rests upon the fact that in it objects are
represented by signs. The so-called logical (cid:16)constants(cid:17) are not represented
by signs, but are themselves present in the proposition as in the fact. The
proposition and the fact must exhibit the same logical (cid:16)manifold,(cid:17) and
this cannot be itself represented since it has to be in common between
the fact and the picture. Mr Wittgenstein maintains that everything
properly philosophical belongs to what can only be shown, to what is
in common between a fact and its logical picture. It results from this
view that nothing correct can be said in philosophy. Every philosophical
proposition is bad grammar, and the best that we can hope to achieve
by philosophical discussion is to lead people to see that philosophical
discussion is a mistake. (cid:16)Philosophy is not one of the natural sciences.
(The word ‘philosophy’ must mean something which stands above or
below, but not beside the natural sciences.) The object of philosophy is
the logical clari(cid:28)cation of thoughts. Philosophy is not a theory but an
activity. A philosophical work consists essentially of elucidations. The
result of philosophy is not a number of ‘philosophical propositions,’ but
to make propositions clear. Philosophy should make clear and delimit
sharply the thoughts which otherwise are, as it were, opaque and blurred(cid:17)
(4.111 and 4.112). In accordance with this principle the things that have
to be said in leading the reader to understand Mr Wittgenstein’s theory
are all of them things which that theory itself condemns as meaningless.
With this proviso we will endeavour to convey the picture of the world
which seems to underlie his system.
The world consists of facts: facts cannot strictly speaking be de(cid:28)ned,
but we can explain what we mean by saying that facts are what make
propositions true, or false. Facts may contain parts which are facts or
may contain no such parts; for example: (cid:16)Socrates was a wise Athe-
nian,(cid:17) consists of the two facts, (cid:16)Socrates was wise,(cid:17) and (cid:16)Socrates was
an Athenian.(cid:17) A fact which has no parts that are facts is called by
Mr Wittgenstein a Sachverhalt. This is the same thing that he calls an
atomic fact. An atomic fact, although it contains no parts that are facts,
nevertheless does contain parts. If we may regard (cid:16)Socrates is wise(cid:17) as
an atomic fact we perceive that it contains the constituents (cid:16)Socrates(cid:17)
and (cid:16)wise.(cid:17) If an atomic fact is analysed as fully as possible (theoret-
ical, not practical possibility is meant) the constituents (cid:28)nally reached
10

INTRODUCTION
may be called (cid:16)simples(cid:17) or (cid:16)objects.(cid:17) It is not contended by Wittgenstein
that we can actually isolate the simple or have empirical knowledge of
it. It is a logical necessity demanded by theory, like an electron. His
ground for maintaining that there must be simples is that every complex
presupposes a fact. It is not necessarily assumed that the complexity of
facts is (cid:28)nite; even if every fact consisted of an in(cid:28)nite number of atomic
facts and if every atomic fact consisted of an in(cid:28)nite number of objects
there would still be objects and atomic facts (4.2211). The assertion that
there is a certain complex reduces to the assertion that its constituents
are related in a certain way, which is the assertion of a fact: thus if
we give a name to the complex the name only has meaning in virtue
of the truth of a certain proposition, namely the proposition asserting
the relatedness of the constituents of the complex. Thus the naming of
complexes presupposes propositions, while propositions presupposes the
naming of simples. In this way the naming of simples is shown to be
what is logically (cid:28)rst in logic.
The world is fully described if all atomic facts are known, together
with the fact that these are all of them. The world is not described
by merely naming all the objects in it; it is necessary also to know the
atomic facts of which these objects are constituents. Given this total of
atomic facts, every true proposition, however complex, can theoretically
be inferred. A proposition (true or false) asserting an atomic fact is called
an atomic proposition. All atomic propositions are logically independent
of each other. No atomic proposition implies any other or is inconsistent
with any other. Thus the whole business of logical inference is concerned
with propositions which are not atomic. Such propositions may be called
molecular.
Wittgenstein’s theory of molecular propositions turns upon his theory
of the construction of truth-functions.
A truth-function of a proposition p is a proposition containing p and
such that its truth or falsehood depends only upon the truth or falsehood
of p, and similarly a truth-function of several propositions p, q, r...is
one containing p, q, r...and such that its truth or falsehood depends
only upon the truth or falsehood of p, q, r... It might seem at (cid:28)rst
sight as though there were other functions of propositions besides truth-
functions; such, for example, would be (cid:16)A believes p,(cid:17) for in general A
will believe some true propositions and some false ones: unless he is an
exceptionally gifted individual, we cannot infer that p is true from the fact
that he believes it or that p is false from the fact that he does not believe
11

INTRODUCTION
it. Other apparent exceptions would be such as (cid:16)p is a very complex
proposition(cid:17) or (cid:16)p is a proposition about Socrates.(cid:17) Mr Wittgenstein
maintains, however, for reasons which will appear presently, that such
exceptions are only apparent, and that every function of a proposition is
really a truth-function. It follows that if we can de(cid:28)ne truth-functions
generally, we can obtain a general de(cid:28)nition of all propositions in terms
of the original set of atomic propositions. This Wittgenstein proceeds to
do.
It has been shown by Dr She(cid:27)er (Trans. Am. Math. Soc., Vol. XIV.
pp. 481(cid:21)488) that all truth-functions of a given set of propositions can be
constructed out of either of the two functions (cid:16)not-p or not-q(cid:17) or (cid:16)not-p
and not-q.(cid:17) Wittgenstein makes use of the latter, assuming a knowledge
of Dr She(cid:27)er’s work. The manner in which other truth-functions are
constructed out of (cid:16)not-p and not-q(cid:17) is easy to see. (cid:16)Not-p and not-p(cid:17) is
equivalent to (cid:16)not-p,(cid:17) hence we obtain a de(cid:28)nition of negation in terms
of our primitive function: hence we can de(cid:28)ne (cid:16)p or q,(cid:17) since this is
the negation of (cid:16)not-p and not-q,(cid:17) i.e. of our primitive function. The
development of other truth-functions out of (cid:16)not-p(cid:17) and (cid:16)p or q(cid:17) is given
in detail at the beginning of Principia Mathematica. This gives all that is
wanted when the propositions which are arguments to our truth-function
are given by enumeration. Wittgenstein, however, by a very interesting
analysis succeeds in extending the process to general propositions, i.e. to
cases where the propositions which are arguments to our truth-function
are not given by enumeration but are given as all those satisfying some
condition. For example, let fx be a propositional function (i.e. a function
whose values are propositions), such as (cid:16)x is human(cid:17)(cid:22)then the various
values of fx form a set of propositions. We may extend the idea (cid:16)not-p
and not-q(cid:17) so as to apply to simultaneous denial of all the propositions
which are values of fx. In this way we arrive at the proposition which
is ordinarily represented in mathematical logic by the words (cid:16)fx is false
for all values of x.(cid:17) The negation of this would be the proposition (cid:16)there
is at least one x for which fx is true(cid:17) which is represented by (cid:16)(∃x).fx.(cid:17)
If we had started with not-fx instead of fx we should have arrived at
the proposition (cid:16)fx is true for all values of x(cid:17) which is represented by
(cid:16)(x).fx.(cid:17) Wittgenstein’s method of dealing with general propositions [i.e.
(cid:16)(x) . fx(cid:17) and (cid:16)(∃x) . fx(cid:17)] di(cid:27)ers from previous methods by the fact that
the generality comes only in specifying the set of propositions concerned,
and when this has been done the building up of truth-functions proceeds
exactly as it would in the case of a (cid:28)nite number of enumerated arguments
p, q, r ....
12

INTRODUCTION
Mr Wittgenstein’s explanation of his symbolism at this point is not
quite fully given in the text. The symbol he uses is (p,ξ,N(ξ)). The
following is the explanation of this symbol:
p stands for all atomic propositions.
ξ stands for any set of propositions.
N(ξ) stands for the negation of all the proposi-
tions making up ξ.
The whole symbol (p,ξ,N(ξ)) means whatever can be obtained by
taking any selection of atomic propositions, negating them all, then tak-
ing any selection of the set of propositions now obtained, together with
any of the originals(cid:22)and so on inde(cid:28)nitely. This is, he says, the general
truth-function and also the general form of proposition. What is meant
is somewhat less complicated than it sounds. The symbol is intended to
describe a process by the help of which, given the atomic propositions,
all others can be manufactured. The process depends upon:
(a) She(cid:27)er’s proof that all truth-functions can be obtained out of
simultaneous negation, i.e. out of (cid:16)not-p and not-q(cid:17);
(b) Mr Wittgenstein’s theory of the derivation of general propositions
from conjunctions and disjunctions;
(c) The assertion that a proposition can only occur in another prop-
osition as argument to a truth-function. Given these three foundations,
it follows that all propositions which are not atomic can be derived from
such as are, by a uniform process, and it is this process which is indicated
by Mr Wittgenstein’s symbol.
From this uniform method of construction we arrive at an amazing
simpli(cid:28)cation of the theory of inference, as well as a de(cid:28)nition of the sort
of propositions that belong to logic. The method of generation which has
just been described, enables Wittgenstein to say that all propositions can
be constructed in the above manner from atomic propositions, and in this
way the totality of propositions is de(cid:28)ned. (The apparent exceptions
which we mentioned above are dealt with in a manner which we shall
consider later.) Wittgenstein is enabled to assert that propositions are
all that follows from the totality of atomic propositions (together with
the fact that it is the totality of them); that a proposition is always a
truth-function of atomic propositions; and that if p follows from q the
meaning of p is contained in the meaning of q, from which of course it
results that nothing can be deduced from an atomic proposition. All the
13

INTRODUCTION
propositions of logic, he maintains, are tautologies, such, for example, as
(cid:16)p or not p.(cid:17)
The fact that nothing can be deduced from an atomic proposition
has interesting applications, for example, to causality. There cannot, in
Wittgenstein’s logic, be any such thing as a causal nexus. (cid:16)The events
of the future,(cid:17) he says, (cid:16)cannot be inferred from those of the present.
Superstition is the belief in the causal nexus.(cid:17) That the sun will rise
to-morrow is a hypothesis. We do not in fact know whether it will rise,
since there is no compulsion according to which one thing must happen
because another happens.
Let us now take up another subject(cid:22)that of names. In Wittgenstein’s
theoretical logical language, names are only given to simples. We do
not give two names to one thing, or one name to two things. There
is no way whatever, according to him, by which we can describe the
totality of things that can be named, in other words, the totality of
what there is in the world. In order to be able to do this we should
have to know of some property which must belong to every thing by
a logical necessity. It has been sought to (cid:28)nd such a property in self-
identity, but the conception of identity is subjected by Wittgenstein to a
destructive criticism from which there seems no escape. The de(cid:28)nition of
identity by means of the identity of indiscernibles is rejected, because the
identity of indiscernibles appears to be not a logically necessary principle.
According to this principle x is identical with y if every property of x is a
property of y, but it would, after all, be logically possible for two things
to have exactly the same properties. If this does not in fact happen
that is an accidental characteristic of the world, not a logically necessary
characteristic, and accidental characteristics of the world must, of course,
not be admitted into the structure of logic. Mr Wittgenstein accordingly
banishes identity and adopts the convention that di(cid:27)erent letters are to
mean di(cid:27)erent things. In practice, identity is needed as between a name
and a description or between two descriptions. It is needed for such
propositions as (cid:16)Socrates is the philosopher who drank the hemlock,(cid:17) or
(cid:16)The even prime is the next number after 1.(cid:17) For such uses of identity it
is easy to provide on Wittgenstein’s system.
The rejection of identity removes one method of speaking of the to-
tality of things, and it will be found that any other method that may be
suggested is equally fallacious: so, at least, Wittgenstein contends and, I
think, rightly. This amounts to saying that (cid:16)object(cid:17) is a pseudo-concept.
To say (cid:16)x is an object(cid:17) is to say nothing. It follows from this that we
14

INTRODUCTION
cannot make such statements as (cid:16)there are more than three objects in the
world,(cid:17) or (cid:16)there are an in(cid:28)nite number of objects in the world.(cid:17) Objects
can only be mentioned in connexion with some de(cid:28)nite property. We can
say (cid:16)there are more than three objects which are human,(cid:17) or (cid:16)there are
more than three objects which are red,(cid:17) for in these statements the word
object can be replaced by a variable in the language of logic, the variable
being one which satis(cid:28)es in the (cid:28)rst case the function (cid:16)x is human(cid:17); in
the second the function (cid:16)x is red.(cid:17) But when we attempt to say (cid:16)there
are more than three objects,(cid:17) this substitution of the variable for the
word (cid:16)object(cid:17) becomes impossible, and the proposition is therefore seen
to be meaningless.
We here touch one instance of Wittgenstein’s fundamental thesis,
that it is impossible to say anything about the world as a whole, and
that whatever can be said has to be about bounded portions of the world.
This view may have been originally suggested by notation, and if so, that
is much in its favour, for a good notation has a subtlety and suggestive-
ness which at times make it seem almost like a live teacher. Notational
irregularities are often the (cid:28)rst sign of philosophical errors, and a perfect
notation would be a substitute for thought. But although notation may
have (cid:28)rst suggested to Mr Wittgenstein the limitation of logic to things
within the world as opposed to the world as a whole, yet the view, once
suggested, is seen to have much else to recommend it. Whether it is
ultimately true I do not, for my part, profess to know. In this Introduc-
tion I am concerned to expound it, not to pronounce upon it. According
to this view we could only say things about the world as a whole if we
could get outside the world, if, that is to say, it ceased to be for us the
whole world. Our world may be bounded for some superior being who
can survey it from above, but for us, however (cid:28)nite it may be, it cannot
have a boundary, since it has nothing outside it. Wittgenstein uses, as
an analogy, the (cid:28)eld of vision. Our (cid:28)eld of vision does not, for us, have a
visual boundary, just because there is nothing outside it, and in like man-
ner our logical world has no logical boundary because our logic knows of
nothing outside it. These considerations lead him to a somewhat curious
discussion of Solipsism. Logic, he says, (cid:28)lls the world. The boundaries of
the world are also its boundaries. In logic, therefore, we cannot say, there
is this and this in the world, but not that, for to say so would apparently
presuppose that we exclude certain possibilities, and this cannot be the
case, since it would require that logic should go beyond the boundaries of
the world as if it could contemplate these boundaries from the other side
15

INTRODUCTION
also. What we cannot think we cannot think, therefore we also cannot
say what we cannot think.
This, he says, gives the key to Solipsism. What Solipsism intends is
quite correct, but this cannot be said, it can only be shown. That the
world is my world appears in the fact that the boundaries of language
(the only language I understand) indicate the boundaries of my world.
The metaphysical subject does not belong to the world but is a boundary
of the world.
We must take up next the question of molecular propositions which
are at (cid:28)rst sight not truth-functions, of the propositions that they con-
tain, such, for example, as (cid:16)A believes p.(cid:17)
Wittgenstein introduces this subject in the statement of his position,
namely, that all molecular functions are truth-functions. He says (5.54):
(cid:16)In the general propositional form, propositions occur in a proposition
only as bases of truth-operations.(cid:17) At (cid:28)rst sight, he goes on to explain,
it seems as if a proposition could also occur in other ways, e.g. (cid:16)A believes
p.(cid:17) Here it seems super(cid:28)cially as if the proposition p stood in a sort of
relation to the object A. (cid:16)But it is clear that ‘A believes that p,’ ‘A
thinks p,’ ‘A says p’ are of the form ‘p says p’; and here we have no co-
ordination of a fact and an object, but a co-ordination of facts by means
of a co-ordination of their objects(cid:17) (5.542).
What Mr Wittgenstein says here is said so shortly that its point is
not likely to be clear to those who have not in mind the controversies
with which he is concerned. The theory with which he is disagreeing
will be found in my articles on the nature of truth and falsehood in
Philosophical Essays and Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1906(cid:21)
7. The problem at issue is the problem of the logical form of belief,
i.e. what is the schema representing what occurs when a man believes.
Of course, the problem applies not only to belief, but also to a host of
other mental phenomena which may be called propositional attitudes:
doubting, considering, desiring, etc. In all these cases it seems natural
to express the phenomenon in the form (cid:16)A doubts p,(cid:17) (cid:16)A desires p,(cid:17) etc.,
which makes it appear as though we were dealing with a relation between
a person and a proposition. This cannot, of course, be the ultimate
analysis, since persons are (cid:28)ctions and so are propositions, except in
the sense in which they are facts on their own account. A proposition,
considered as a fact on its own account, may be a set of words which a
man says over to himself, or a complex image, or train of images passing
through his mind, or a set of incipient bodily movements. It may be
16

INTRODUCTION
any one of innumerable di(cid:27)erent things. The proposition as a fact on its
own account, for example the actual set of words the man pronounces
to himself, is not relevant to logic. What is relevant to logic is that
common element among all these facts, which enables him, as we say, to
mean the fact which the proposition asserts. To psychology, of course,
more is relevant; for a symbol does not mean what it symbolizes in virtue
of a logical relation alone, but in virtue also of a psychological relation of
intention, or association, or what-not. The psychological part of meaning,
however, does not concern the logician. What does concern him in this
problem of belief is the logical schema. It is clear that, when a person
believes a proposition, the person, considered as a metaphysical subject,
does not have to be assumed in order to explain what is happening. What
has to be explained is the relation between the set of words which is the
proposition considered as a fact on its own account, and the (cid:16)objective(cid:17)
fact which makes the proposition true or false. This reduces ultimately to
the question of the meaning of propositions, that is to say, the meaning of
propositions is the only non-psychological portion of the problem involved
in the analysis of belief. This problem is simply one of a relation of
two facts, namely, the relation between the series of words used by the
believer and the fact which makes these words true or false. The series of
words is a fact just as much as what makes it true or false is a fact. The
relation between these two facts is not unanalysable, since the meaning
of a proposition results from the meaning of its constituent words. The
meaning of the series of words which is a proposition is a function of the
meanings of the separate words. Accordingly, the proposition as a whole
does not really enter into what has to be explained in explaining the
meaning of a proposition. It would perhaps help to suggest the point of
view which I am trying to indicate, to say that in the cases we have been
considering the proposition occurs as a fact, not as a proposition. Such
a statement, however, must not be taken too literally. The real point
is that in believing, desiring, etc., what is logically fundamental is the
relation of a proposition considered as a fact, to the fact which makes it
true or false, and that this relation of two facts is reducible to a relation
of their constituents. Thus the proposition does not occur at all in the
same sense in which it occurs in a truth-function.
There are some respects, in which, as it seems to me, Mr Wittgen-
stein’s theory stands in need of greater technical development. This ap-
plies in particular to his theory of number (6.02 (cid:27).) which, as it stands, is
only capable of dealing with (cid:28)nite numbers. No logic can be considered
17

INTRODUCTION
adequate until it has been shown to be capable of dealing with trans(cid:28)nite
numbers. I do not think there is anything in Mr Wittgenstein’s system
to make it impossible for him to (cid:28)ll this lacuna.
More interesting than such questions of comparative detail is Mr
Wittgenstein’s attitude towards the mystical. His attitude upon this
grows naturally out of his doctrine in pure logic, according to which the
logical proposition is a picture (true or false) of the fact, and has in
common with the fact a certain structure. It is this common structure
which makes it capable of being a picture of the fact, but the structure
cannot itself be put into words, since it is a structure of words, as well
as of the facts to which they refer. Everything, therefore, which is in-
volved in the very idea of the expressiveness of language must remain
incapable of being expressed in language, and is, therefore, inexpressible
in a perfectly precise sense. This inexpressible contains, according to Mr
Wittgenstein, the whole of logic and philosophy. The right method of
teaching philosophy, he says, would be to con(cid:28)ne oneself to propositions
of the sciences, stated with all possible clearness and exactness, leaving
philosophical assertions to the learner, and proving to him, whenever he
made them, that they are meaningless. It is true that the fate of Socrates
might befall a man who attempted this method of teaching, but we are
not to be deterred by that fear, if it is the only right method. It is not
this that causes some hesitation in accepting Mr Wittgenstein’s position,
in spite of the very powerful arguments which he brings to its support.
What causes hesitation is the fact that, after all, Mr Wittgenstein man-
ages to say a good deal about what cannot be said, thus suggesting to
the sceptical reader that possibly there may be some loophole through
a hierarchy of languages, or by some other exit. The whole subject of
ethics, for example, is placed by Mr Wittgenstein in the mystical, in-
expressible region. Nevertheless he is capable of conveying his ethical
opinions. His defence would be that what he calls the mystical can be
shown, although it cannot be said. It may be that this defence is ade-
quate, but, for my part, I confess that it leaves me with a certain sense
of intellectual discomfort.
There is one purely logical problem in regard to which these di(cid:30)culties
are peculiarly acute. I mean the problem of generality. In the theory
of generality it is necessary to consider all propositions of the form fx
where fx is a given propositional function. This belongs to the part of
logic which can be expressed, according to Mr Wittgenstein’s system.
But the totality of possible values of x which might seem to be involved
18

INTRODUCTION
in the totality of propositions of the form fx is not admitted by Mr
Wittgenstein among the things that can be spoken of, for this is no other
than the totality of things in the world, and thus involves the attempt
to conceive the world as a whole; (cid:16)the feeling of the world as a bounded
whole is the mystical(cid:17); hence the totality of the values of x is mystical
(6.45). This is expressly argued when Mr Wittgenstein denies that we
can make propositions as to how many things there are in the world, as
for example, that there are more than three.
These di(cid:30)culties suggest to my mind some such possibility as this:
that every language has, as Mr Wittgenstein says, a structure concern-
ing which, in the language, nothing can be said, but that there may be
another language dealing with the structure of the (cid:28)rst language, and
having itself a new structure, and that to this hierarchy of languages
there may be no limit. Mr Wittgenstein would of course reply that his
whole theory is applicable unchanged to the totality of such languages.
The only retort would be to deny that there is any such totality. The
totalities concerning which Mr Wittgenstein holds that it is impossible
to speak logically are nevertheless thought by him to exist, and are the
subject-matter of his mysticism. The totality resulting from our hier-
archy would be not merely logically inexpressible, but a (cid:28)ction, a mere
delusion, and in this way the supposed sphere of the mystical would be
abolished. Such an hypothesis is very di(cid:30)cult, and I can see objections
to it which at the moment I do not know how to answer. Yet I do not
see how any easier hypothesis can escape from Mr Wittgenstein’s con-
clusions. Even if this very di(cid:30)cult hypothesis should prove tenable, it
would leave untouched a very large part of Mr Wittgenstein’s theory,
though possibly not the part upon which he himself would wish to lay
most stress. As one with a long experience of the di(cid:30)culties of logic
and of the deceptiveness of theories which seem irrefutable, I (cid:28)nd myself
unable to be sure of the rightness of a theory, merely on the ground that
I cannot see any point on which it is wrong. But to have constructed
a theory of logic which is not at any point obviously wrong is to have
achieved a work of extraordinary di(cid:30)culty and importance. This merit,
in my opinion, belongs to Mr Wittgenstein’s book, and makes it one
which no serious philosopher can a(cid:27)ord to neglect.
Bertrand Russell.
May 1922.
19



Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
DEDICATED
TO THE MEMORY OF MY FRIEND
DAVID H. PINSENT
Motto: ... und alles, was man weiss, nicht bloss rauschen
und brausen geh(cid:246)rt hat, l(cid:228)sst sich in drei Worten sagen.
K(cid:252)rnberger.



Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
PREFACE
This book will perhaps only be understood by those who have them-
selves already thought the thoughts which are expressed in it(cid:22)or similar
thoughts. It is therefore not a text-book. Its object would be attained
if there were one person who read it with understanding and to whom it
a(cid:27)orded pleasure.
The book deals with the problems of philosophy and shows, as I
believe, that the method of formulating these problems rests on the mis-
understanding of the logic of our language. Its whole meaning could be
summed up somewhat as follows: What can be said at all can be said
clearly; and whereof one cannot speak thereof one must be silent.
The book will, therefore, draw a limit to thinking, or rather(cid:22)not to
thinking, but to the expression of thoughts; for, in order to draw a limit
to thinking we should have to be able to think both sides of this limit
(we should therefore have to be able to think what cannot be thought).
The limit can, therefore, only be drawn in language and what lies on
the other side of the limit will be simply nonsense.
How far my e(cid:27)orts agree with those of other philosophers I will not
decide. Indeed what I have here written makes no claim to novelty in
points of detail; and therefore I give no sources, because it is indi(cid:27)erent
to me whether what I have thought has already been thought before me
by another.
I will only mention that to the great works of Frege and the writings
of my friend Bertrand Russell I owe in large measure the stimulation of
my thoughts.
If this work has a value it consists in two things. First that in it
thoughts are expressed, and this value will be the greater the better the
thoughts are expressed. The more the nail has been hit on the head.(cid:22)
Here I am conscious that I have fallen far short of the possible. Simply
because my powers are insu(cid:30)cient to cope with the task.(cid:22)May others
come and do it better.
23

On the other hand the truth of the thoughts communicated here seems
to me unassailable and de(cid:28)nitive. I am, therefore, of the opinion that the
problems have in essentials been (cid:28)nally solved. And if I am not mistaken
in this, then the value of this work secondly consists in the fact that it
shows how little has been done when these problems have been solved.
24

*
1 The world is everything that is the case.
1.1 The world is the totality of facts, not of things.
1.11 The world is determined by the facts, and by these being all the
facts.
1.12 For the totality of facts determines both what is the case, and
also all that is not the case.
1.13 The facts in logical space are the world.
1.2 The world divides into facts.
1.21 Any one can either be the case or not be the case, and everything
else remain the same.
2 What is the case, the fact, is the existence of atomic facts.
2.01 An atomic fact is a combination of objects (entities, things).
2.011 It is essential to a thing that it can be a constituent part of an
atomic fact.
2.012 In logic nothing is accidental: if a thing can occur in an atomic
fact the possibility of that atomic fact must already be prejudged
in the thing.
2.0121 It would, so to speak, appear as an accident, when to a thing
that could exist alone on its own account, subsequently a state
of a(cid:27)airs could be made to (cid:28)t.
If things can occur in atomic facts, this possibility must al-
ready lie in them.
*
The decimal (cid:28)gures as numbers of the separate propositions indicate the logical
importance of the propositions, the emphasis laid upon them in my exposition. The
propositions n.1, n.2, n.3, etc., are comments on proposition No. n; the propositions
n.m1, n.m2, etc., are comments on the proposition No. n.m; and so on.
25

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
(A logical entity cannot be merely possible. Logic treats of
every possibility, and all possibilities are its facts.)
Just as we cannot think of spatial objects at all apart from
space, or temporal objects apart from time, so we cannot think
of any object apart from the possibility of its connexion with
other things.
If I can think of an object in the context of an atomic fact,
I cannot think of it apart from the possibility of this context.
2.0122 The thing is independent, in so far as it can occur in all pos-
sible circumstances, but this form of independence is a form of
connexion with the atomic fact, a form of dependence. (It is
impossible for words to occur in two di(cid:27)erent ways, alone and
in the proposition.)
2.0123 If I know an object, then I also know all the possibilities of its
occurrence in atomic facts.
(Every such possibility must lie in the nature of the object.)
A new possibility cannot subsequently be found.
2.01231 In order to know an object, I must know not its external but all
its internal qualities.
2.0124 If all objects are given, then thereby are all possible atomic facts
also given.
2.013 Every thing is, as it were, in a space of possible atomic facts. I
can think of this space as empty, but not of the thing without
the space.
2.0131 A spatial object must lie in in(cid:28)nite space. (A point in space is
a place for an argument.)
A speck in a visual (cid:28)eld need not be red, but it must have a
colour; it has, so to speak, a colour space round it. A tone must
have a pitch, the object of the sense of touch a hardness, etc.
2.014 Objects contain the possibility of all states of a(cid:27)airs.
2.0141 The possibility of its occurrence in atomic facts is the form of
the object.
2.02 The object is simple.
2.0201 Every statement about complexes can be analysed into a state-
26

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
ment about their constituent parts, and into those propositions
which completely describe the complexes.
2.021 Objects form the substance of the world. Therefore they cannot
be compound.
2.0211 If the world had no substance, then whether a proposition had
sense would depend on whether another proposition was true.
2.0212 It would then be impossible to form a picture of the world (true
or false).
2.022 It is clear that however di(cid:27)erent from the real one an imagined
world may be, it must have something(cid:22)a form(cid:22)in common
with the real world.
2.023 This (cid:28)xed form consists of the objects.
2.0231 The substance of the world can only determine a form and not
any material properties. For these are (cid:28)rst presented by the
propositions(cid:22)(cid:28)rst formed by the con(cid:28)guration of the objects.
2.0232 Roughly speaking: objects are colourless.
2.0233 Two objects of the same logical form are(cid:22)apart from their ex-
ternal properties(cid:22)only di(cid:27)erentiated from one another in that
they are di(cid:27)erent.
2.02331 Either a thing has properties which no other has, and then one
can distinguish it straight away from the others by a description
and refer to it; or, on the other hand, there are several things
which have the totality of their properties in common, and then
it is quite impossible to point to any one of them.
For if a thing is not distinguished by anything, I cannot dis-
tinguish it(cid:22)for otherwise it would be distinguished.
2.024 Substance is what exists independently of what is the case.
2.025 It is form and content.
2.0251 Space, time and colour (colouredness) are forms of objects.
2.026 Only if there are objects can there be a (cid:28)xed form of the world.
2.027 The (cid:28)xed, the existent and the object are one.
2.0271 The object is the (cid:28)xed, the existent; the con(cid:28)guration is the
changing, the variable.
27

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
2.0272 The con(cid:28)guration of the objects forms the atomic fact.
2.03 In the atomic fact objects hang one in another, like the members
of a chain.
2.031 In the atomic fact the objects are combined in a de(cid:28)nite way.
2.032 The way in which objects hang together in the atomic fact is
the structure of the atomic fact.
2.033 The form is the possibility of the structure.
2.034 The structure of the fact consists of the structures of the atomic
facts.
2.04 The totality of existent atomic facts is the world.
2.05 The totality of existent atomic facts also determines which atom-
ic facts do not exist.
2.06 The existence and non-existence of atomic facts is the reality.
(The existence of atomic facts we also call a positive fact,
their non-existence a negative fact.)
2.061 Atomic facts are independent of one another.
2.062 From the existence or non-existence of an atomic fact we cannot
infer the existence or non-existence of another.
2.063 The total reality is the world.
2.1 We make to ourselves pictures of facts.
2.11 The picture presents the facts in logical space, the existence and
non-existence of atomic facts.
2.12 The picture is a model of reality.
2.13 To the objects correspond in the picture the elements of the
picture.
2.131 The elements of the picture stand, in the picture, for the objects.
2.14 The picture consists in the fact that its elements are combined
with one another in a de(cid:28)nite way.
2.141 The picture is a fact.
2.15 That the elements of the picture are combined with one another
in a de(cid:28)nite way, represents that the things are so combined
with one another.
28

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
This connexion of the elements of the picture is called its
structure, and the possibility of this structure is called the form
of representation of the picture.
2.151 The form of representation is the possibility that the things are
combined with one another as are the elements of the picture.
2.1511 Thus the picture is linked with reality; it reaches up to it.
2.1512 It is like a scale applied to reality.
2.15121 Only the outermost points of the dividing lines touch the object
to be measured.
2.1513 According to this view the representing relation which makes it
a picture, also belongs to the picture.
2.1514 The representing relation consists of the co-ordinations of the
elements of the picture and the things.
2.1515 These co-ordinations are as it were the feelers of its elements
with which the picture touches reality.
2.16 In order to be a picture a fact must have something in common
with what it pictures.
2.161 In the picture and the pictured there must be something identi-
cal in order that the one can be a picture of the other at all.
2.17 What the picture must have in common with reality in order to
be able to represent it after its manner(cid:22)rightly or falsely(cid:22)is its
form of representation.
2.171 The picture can represent every reality whose form it has.
The spatial picture, everything spatial, the coloured, every-
thing coloured, etc.
2.172 The picture, however, cannot represent its form of representa-
tion; it shows it forth.
2.173 The picture represents its object from without (its standpoint is
its form of representation), therefore the picture represents its
object rightly or falsely.
2.174 But the picture cannot place itself outside of its form of repre-
sentation.
2.18 What every picture, of whatever form, must have in common
29

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
with reality in order to be able to represent it at all(cid:22)rightly or
falsely(cid:22)is the logical form, that is, the form of reality.
2.181 If the form of representation is the logical form, then the picture
is called a logical picture.
2.182 Every picture is also a logical picture. (On the other hand, for
example, not every picture is spatial.)
2.19 The logical picture can depict the world.
2.2 The picture has the logical form of representation in common
with what it pictures.
2.201 The picture depicts reality by representing a possibility of the
existence and non-existence of atomic facts.
2.202 The picture represents a possible state of a(cid:27)airs in logical space.
2.203 The picture contains the possibility of the state of a(cid:27)airs which
it represents.
2.21 The picture agrees with reality or not; it is right or wrong, true
or false.
2.22 The picture represents what it represents, independently of its
truth or falsehood, through the form of representation.
2.221 What the picture represents is its sense.
2.222 In the agreement or disagreement of its sense with reality, its
truth or falsity consists.
2.223 In order to discover whether the picture is true or false we must
compare it with reality.
2.224 It cannot be discovered from the picture alone whether it is true
or false.
2.225 There is no picture which is a priori true.
3 The logical picture of the facts is the thought.
3.001 (cid:16)An atomic fact is thinkable(cid:17)(cid:22)means: we can imagine it.
3.01 The totality of true thoughts is a picture of the world.
3.02 The thought contains the possibility of the state of a(cid:27)airs which
it thinks.
What is thinkable is also possible.
30

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
3.03 We cannot think anything unlogical, for otherwise we should
have to think unlogically.
3.031 It used to be said that God could create everything, except what
was contrary to the laws of logic. The truth is, we could not say
of an (cid:16)unlogical(cid:17) world how it would look.
3.032 To present in language anything which (cid:16)contradicts logic(cid:17) is as
impossible as in geometry to present by its co-ordinates a (cid:28)gure
which contradicts the laws of space; or to give the co-ordinates
of a point which does not exist.
3.0321 We could present spatially an atomic fact which contradicted
the laws of physics, but not one which contradicted the laws of
geometry.
3.04 An a priori true thought would be one whose possibility guar-
anteed its truth.
3.05 We could only know a priori that a thought is true if its truth
was to be recognized from the thought itself (without an object
of comparison).
3.1 In the proposition the thought is expressed perceptibly through
the senses.
3.11 We use the sensibly perceptible sign (sound or written sign, etc.)
of the proposition as a projection of the possible state of a(cid:27)airs.
The method of projection is the thinking of the sense of the
proposition.
3.12 The sign through which we express the thought I call the prop-
ositional sign. And the proposition is the propositional sign in
its projective relation to the world.
3.13 To the proposition belongs everything which belongs to the pro-
jection; but not what is projected.
Therefore the possibility of what is projected but not this
itself.
In the proposition, therefore, its sense is not yet contained,
but the possibility of expressing it.
((cid:16)The content of the proposition(cid:17) means the content of the
signi(cid:28)cant proposition.)
In the proposition the form of its sense is contained, but not
its content.
31

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
3.14 The propositional sign consists in the fact that its elements, the
words, are combined in it in a de(cid:28)nite way.
The propositional sign is a fact.
3.141 The proposition is not a mixture of words (just as the musical
theme is not a mixture of tones).
The proposition is articulate.
3.142 Only facts can express a sense, a class of names cannot.
3.143 That the propositional sign is a fact is concealed by the ordinary
form of expression, written or printed.
(For in the printed proposition, for example, the sign of a
proposition does not appear essentially di(cid:27)erent from a word.
Thus it was possible for Frege to call the proposition a com-
pounded name.)
3.1431 The essential nature of the propositional sign becomes very clear
when we imagine it made up of spatial objects (such as tables,
chairs, books) instead of written signs.
The mutual spatial position of these things then expresses
the sense of the proposition.
3.1432 We must not say, (cid:16)The complex sign ‘aRb’ says ‘a stands in
relation R to b’(cid:17); but we must say, (cid:16)That ‘a’ stands in a certain
relation to ‘b’ says that aRb(cid:17).
3.144 States of a(cid:27)airs can be described but not named.
(Names resemble points; propositions resemble arrows, they
have sense.)
3.2 In propositions thoughts can be so expressed that to the objects
of the thoughts correspond the elements of the propositional
sign.
3.201 These elements I call (cid:16)simple signs(cid:17) and the proposition (cid:16)com-
pletely analysed(cid:17).
3.202 The simple signs employed in propositions are called names.
3.203 The name means the object. The object is its meaning. ((cid:16)A(cid:17) is
the same sign as (cid:16)A(cid:17).)
3.21 To the con(cid:28)guration of the simple signs in the propositional
sign corresponds the con(cid:28)guration of the objects in the state of
a(cid:27)airs.
32

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
3.22 In the proposition the name represents the object.
3.221 Objects I can only name. Signs represent them. I can only speak
of them. I cannot assert them. A proposition can only say how
a thing is, not what it is.
3.23 The postulate of the possibility of the simple signs is the postu-
late of the determinateness of the sense.
3.24 A proposition about a complex stands in internal relation to the
proposition about its constituent part.
A complex can only be given by its description, and this
will either be right or wrong. The proposition in which there
is mention of a complex, if this does not exist, becomes not
nonsense but simply false.
That a propositional element signi(cid:28)es a complex can be seen
from an indeterminateness in the propositions in which it oc-
curs. We know that everything is not yet determined by this
proposition. (The notation for generality contains a prototype.)
The combination of the symbols of a complex in a simple
symbol can be expressed by a de(cid:28)nition.
3.25 There is one and only one complete analysis of the proposition.
3.251 The proposition expresses what it expresses in a de(cid:28)nite and
clearly speci(cid:28)able way: the proposition is articulate.
3.26 The name cannot be analysed further by any de(cid:28)nition. It is a
primitive sign.
3.261 Every de(cid:28)ned sign signi(cid:28)es via those signs by which it is de(cid:28)ned,
and the de(cid:28)nitions show the way.
Two signs, one a primitive sign, and one de(cid:28)ned by primitive
signs, cannot signify in the same way. Names cannot be taken to
pieces by de(cid:28)nition (nor any sign which alone and independently
has a meaning).
3.262 What does not get expressed in the sign is shown by its appli-
cation. What the signs conceal, their application declares.
3.263 The meanings of primitive signs can be explained by elucida-
tions. Elucidations are propositions which contain the primitive
signs. They can, therefore, only be understood when the mean-
ings of these signs are already known.
33

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
3.3 Only the proposition has sense; only in the context of a propo-
sition has a name meaning.
3.31 Every part of a proposition which characterizes its sense I call
an expression (a symbol).
(The proposition itself is an expression.)
Expressions are everything(cid:22)essential for the sense of the
proposition(cid:22)that propositions can have in common with one
another.
An expression characterizes a form and a content.
3.311 An expression presupposes the forms of all propositions in which
it can occur. It is the common characteristic mark of a class of
propositions.
3.312 It is therefore represented by the general form of the propositions
which it characterizes.
And in this form the expression is constant and everything
else variable.
3.313 An expression is thus presented by a variable, whose values are
the propositions which contain the expression.
(In the limiting case the variables become constants, the ex-
pression a proposition.)
I call such a variable a (cid:16)propositional variable(cid:17).
3.314 An expression has meaning only in a proposition. Every variable
can be conceived as a propositional variable.
(Including the variable name.)
3.315 If we change a constituent part of a proposition into a variable,
there is a class of propositions which are all the values of the re-
sulting variable proposition. This class in general still depends
on what, by arbitrary agreement, we mean by parts of that prop-
osition. But if we change all those signs, whose meaning was ar-
bitrarily determined, into variables, there always remains such
a class. But this is now no longer dependent on any agreement;
it depends only on the nature of the proposition. It corresponds
to a logical form, to a logical prototype.
3.316 What values the propositional variable can assume is deter-
mined.
34

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
The determination of the values is the variable.
3.317 The determination of the values of the propositional variable
is done by indicating the propositions whose common mark the
variable is.
The determination is a description of these propositions.
The determination will therefore deal only with symbols not
with their meaning.
And only this is essential to the determination, that it is
only a description of symbols and asserts nothing about what is
symbolized.
The way in which we describe the propositions is not essen-
tial.
3.318 I conceive the proposition(cid:22)like Frege and Russell(cid:22)as a function
of the expressions contained in it.
3.32 The sign is the part of the symbol perceptible by the senses.
3.321 Two di(cid:27)erent symbols can therefore have the sign (the written
sign or the sound sign) in common(cid:22)they then signify in di(cid:27)erent
ways.
3.322 It can never indicate the common characteristic of two objects
that we symbolize them with the same signs but by di(cid:27)erent
methods of symbolizing. For the sign is arbitrary. We could
therefore equally well choose two di(cid:27)erent signs and where then
would be what was common in the symbolization.
3.323 In the language of everyday life it very often happens that the
same word signi(cid:28)es in two di(cid:27)erent ways(cid:22)and therefore belongs
to two di(cid:27)erent symbols(cid:22)or that two words, which signify in
di(cid:27)erent ways, are apparently applied in the same way in the
proposition.
Thus the word (cid:16)is(cid:17) appears as the copula, as the sign of
equality, and as the expression of existence; (cid:16)to exist(cid:17) as an
intransitive verb like (cid:16)to go(cid:17); (cid:16)identical(cid:17) as an adjective; we speak
of something but also of the fact of something happening.
(In the proposition (cid:16)Green is green(cid:17)(cid:22)where the (cid:28)rst word is
a proper name and the last an adjective(cid:22)these words have not
merely di(cid:27)erent meanings but they are di(cid:27)erent symbols.)
35

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
3.324 Thus there easily arise the most fundamental confusions (of
which the whole of philosophy is full).
3.325 In order to avoid these errors, we must employ a symbolism
which excludes them, by not applying the same sign in di(cid:27)erent
symbols and by not applying signs in the same way which signify
in di(cid:27)erent ways. A symbolism, that is to say, which obeys the
rules of logical grammar(cid:22)of logical syntax.
(The logical symbolism of Frege and Russell is such a lan-
guage, which, however, does still not exclude all errors.)
3.326 In order to recognize the symbol in the sign we must consider
the signi(cid:28)cant use.
3.327 The sign determines a logical form only together with its logical
syntactic application.
3.328 If a sign is not necessary then it is meaningless. That is the
meaning of Occam’s razor.
(If everything in the symbolism works as though a sign had
meaning, then it has meaning.)
3.33 In logical syntax the meaning of a sign ought never to play a
r(cid:244)le; it must admit of being established without mention being
thereby made of the meaning of a sign; it ought to presuppose
only the description of the expressions.
3.331 From this observation we get a further view(cid:22)into Russell’s The-
ory of Types. Russell’s error is shown by the fact that in drawing
up his symbolic rules he has to speak of the meaning of the signs.
3.332 No proposition can say anything about itself, because the prop-
ositional sign cannot be contained in itself (that is the (cid:16)whole
theory of types(cid:17)).
3.333 A function cannot be its own argument, because the functional
sign already contains the prototype of its own argument and it
cannot contain itself.
If, for example, we suppose that the function F(fx) could
be its own argument, then there would be a proposition
(cid:16)F(F(fx))(cid:17), and in this the outer function F and the inner
function F must have di(cid:27)erent meanings; for the inner has
the form ϕ(fx), the outer the form ψ(ϕ(fx)). Common to
36

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
both functions is only the letter (cid:16)F(cid:17), which by itself signi(cid:28)es
nothing.
This is at once clear, if instead of (cid:16)F(F(u))(cid:17) we write (cid:16)(∃ϕ) :
F(ϕu) . ϕu = Fu(cid:17).
Herewith Russell’s paradox vanishes.
3.334 The rules of logical syntax must follow of themselves, if we only
know how every single sign signi(cid:28)es.
3.34 A proposition possesses essential and accidental features.
Accidental are the features which are due to a particular way
of producing the propositional sign. Essential are those which
alone enable the proposition to express its sense.
3.341 The essential in a proposition is therefore that which is common
to all propositions which can express the same sense.
And in the same way in general the essential in a symbol is
that which all symbols which can ful(cid:28)l the same purpose have
in common.
3.3411 One could therefore say the real name is that which all symbols,
which signify an object, have in common. It would then follow,
step by step, that no sort of composition was essential for a
name.
3.342 In our notations there is indeed something arbitrary, but this
is not arbitrary, namely that if we have determined anything
arbitrarily, then something else must be the case. (This results
from the essence of the notation.)
3.3421 A particular method of symbolizing may be unimportant, but it
is always important that this is a possible method of symboliz-
ing. And this happens as a rule in philosophy: The single thing
proves over and over again to be unimportant, but the possibil-
ity of every single thing reveals something about the nature of
the world.
3.343 De(cid:28)nitions are rules for the translation of one language into
another. Every correct symbolism must be translatable into
every other according to such rules. It is this which all have in
common.
37

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
3.344 What signi(cid:28)es in the symbol is what is common to all those
symbols by which it can be replaced according to the rules of
logical syntax.
3.3441 We can, for example, express what is common to all notations
for the truth-functions as follows: It is common to them that
they all, for example, can be replaced by the notations of (cid:16) ∼p(cid:17)
((cid:16)not p(cid:17)) and (cid:16)p ∨ q(cid:17) ((cid:16)p or q(cid:17)).
(Herewith is indicated the way in which a special possible
notation can give us general information.)
3.3442 The sign of the complex is not arbitrarily resolved in the analysis,
in such a way that its resolution would be di(cid:27)erent in every
propositional structure.
3.4 The proposition determines a place in logical space: the exis-
tence of this logical place is guaranteed by the existence of the
constituent parts alone, by the existence of the signi(cid:28)cant prop-
osition.
3.41 The propositional sign and the logical co-ordinates: that is the
logical place.
3.411 The geometrical and the logical place agree in that each is the
possibility of an existence.
3.42 Although a proposition may only determine one place in logical
space, the whole logical space must already be given by it.
(Otherwise denial, the logical sum, the logical product, etc.,
would always introduce new elements(cid:22)in co-ordination.)
(The logical sca(cid:27)olding round the picture determines the log-
ical space. The proposition reaches through the whole logical
space.)
3.5 The applied, thought, propositional sign is the thought.
4 The thought is the signi(cid:28)cant proposition.
4.001 The totality of propositions is the language.
4.002 Man possesses the capacity of constructing languages, in which
every sense can be expressed, without having an idea how and
what each word means(cid:22)just as one speaks without knowing how
the single sounds are produced.
38

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
Colloquial language is a part of the human organism and is
not less complicated than it.
From it it is humanly impossible to gather immediately the
logic of language.
Language disguises the thought; so that from the external
form of the clothes one cannot infer the form of the thought they
clothe, because the external form of the clothes is constructed
with quite another object than to let the form of the body be
recognized.
The silent adjustments to understand colloquial language are
enormously complicated.
4.003 Most propositions and questions, that have been written about
philosophical matters, are not false, but senseless. We can-
not, therefore, answer questions of this kind at all, but only
state their senselessness. Most questions and propositions of
the philosophers result from the fact that we do not understand
the logic of our language.
(They are of the same kind as the question whether the Good
is more or less identical than the Beautiful.)
And so it is not to be wondered at that the deepest problems
are really no problems.
4.0031 All philosophy is (cid:16)Critique of language(cid:17) (but not at all in Mauth-
ner’s sense). Russell’s merit is to have shown that the apparent
logical form of the proposition need not be its real form.
4.01 The proposition is a picture of reality.
The proposition is a model of the reality as we think it is.
4.011 At the (cid:28)rst glance the proposition(cid:22)say as it stands printed on
paper(cid:22)does not seem to be a picture of the reality of which it
treats. But nor does the musical score appear at (cid:28)rst sight to
be a picture of a musical piece; nor does our phonetic spelling
(letters) seem to be a picture of our spoken language. And yet
these symbolisms prove to be pictures(cid:22)even in the ordinary
sense of the word(cid:22)of what they represent.
4.012 It is obvious that we perceive a proposition of the form aRb as
a picture. Here the sign is obviously a likeness of the signi(cid:28)ed.
4.013 And if we penetrate to the essence of this pictorial nature we
39

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
see that this is not disturbed by apparent irregularities (like the
use of ♯ and ♭ in the score).
For these irregularities also picture what they are to express;
only in another way.
4.014 The gramophone record, the musical thought, the score, the
waves of sound, all stand to one another in that pictorial internal
relation, which holds between language and the world. To all of
them the logical structure is common.
(Like the two youths, their two horses and their lilies in the
story. They are all in a certain sense one.)
4.0141 In the fact that there is a general rule by which the musician is
able to read the symphony out of the score, and that there is
a rule by which one could reconstruct the symphony from the
line on a gramophone record and from this again(cid:22)by means
of the (cid:28)rst rule(cid:22)construct the score, herein lies the internal
similarity between these things which at (cid:28)rst sight seem to be
entirely di(cid:27)erent. And the rule is the law of projection which
projects the symphony into the language of the musical score.
It is the rule of translation of this language into the language of
the gramophone record.
4.015 The possibility of all similes, of all the imagery of our language,
rests on the logic of representation.
4.016 In order to understand the essence of the proposition, consider
hieroglyphic writing, which pictures the facts it describes.
And from it came the alphabet without the essence of the
representation being lost.
4.02 This we see from the fact that we understand the sense of the
propositional sign, without having had it explained to us.
4.021 The proposition is a picture of reality, for I know the state of
a(cid:27)airs presented by it, if I understand the proposition. And I
understand the proposition, without its sense having been ex-
plained to me.
4.022 The proposition shows its sense.
The proposition shows how things stand, if it is true. And
it says, that they do so stand.
40

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
4.023 The proposition determines reality to this extent, that one only
needs to say (cid:16)Yes(cid:17) or (cid:16)No(cid:17) to it to make it agree with reality.
It must therefore be completely described by the proposition.
A proposition is the description of a fact.
As the description of an object describes it by its external
properties so propositions describe reality by its internal prop-
erties.
The proposition constructs a world with the help of a logical
sca(cid:27)olding, and therefore one can actually see in the proposition
all the logical features possessed by reality if it is true. One can
draw conclusions from a false proposition.
4.024 To understand a proposition means to know what is the case, if
it is true.
(One can therefore understand it without knowing whether
it is true or not.)
One understands it if one understands its constituent parts.
4.025 The translation of one language into another is not a process
of translating each proposition of the one into a proposition of
the other, but only the constituent parts of propositions are
translated.
(And the dictionary does not only translate substantives but
also adverbs and conjunctions, etc., and it treats them all alike.)
4.026 The meanings of the simple signs (the words) must be explained
to us, if we are to understand them.
By means of propositions we explain ourselves.
4.027 It is essential to propositions, that they can communicate a new
sense to us.
4.03 A proposition must communicate a new sense with old words.
The proposition communicates to us a state of a(cid:27)airs, there-
fore it must be essentially connected with the state of a(cid:27)airs.
And the connexion is, in fact, that it is its logical picture.
The proposition only asserts something, in so far as it is a
picture.
4.031 In the proposition a state of a(cid:27)airs is, as it were, put together
for the sake of experiment.
41

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
One can say, instead of, This proposition has such and such
a sense, This proposition represents such and such a state of
a(cid:27)airs.
4.0311 One name stands for one thing, and another for another thing,
and they are connected together. And so the whole, like a living
picture, presents the atomic fact.
4.0312 The possibility of propositions is based upon the principle of the
representation of objects by signs.
My fundamental thought is that the (cid:16)logical constants(cid:17) do
not represent. That the logic of the facts cannot be represented.
4.032 The proposition is a picture of its state of a(cid:27)airs, only in so far
as it is logically articulated.
(Even the proposition (cid:16)ambulo(cid:17) is composite, for its stem
gives a di(cid:27)erent sense with another termination, or its termina-
tion with another stem.)
4.04 In the proposition there must be exactly as many things distin-
guishable as there are in the state of a(cid:27)airs, which it represents.
They must both possess the same logical (mathematical)
multiplicity (cf. Hertz’s Mechanics, on Dynamic Models).
4.041 This mathematical multiplicity naturally cannot in its turn be
represented. One cannot get outside it in the representation.
4.0411 If we tried, for example, to express what is expressed by (cid:16)(x).fx(cid:17)
by putting an index before fx, like: (cid:16)Gen. fx(cid:17), it would not do,
we should not know what was generalized. If we tried to show
it by an index g, like: (cid:16)f(x )(cid:17) it would not do(cid:22)we should not
g
know the scope of the generalization.
If we were to try it by introducing a mark in the argument
places, like (cid:16)(G,G) . F(G,G)(cid:17), it would not do(cid:22)we could not
determine the identity of the variables, etc.
All these ways of symbolizing are inadequate because they
have not the necessary mathematical multiplicity.
4.0412 For the same reason the idealist explanation of the seeing of spa-
tial relations through (cid:16)spatial spectacles(cid:17) does not do, because
it cannot explain the multiplicity of these relations.
4.05 Reality is compared with the proposition.
42

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
4.06 Propositions can be true or false only by being pictures of the
reality.
4.061 If one does not observe that propositions have a sense inde-
pendent of the facts, one can easily believe that true and false
are two relations between signs and things signi(cid:28)ed with equal
rights.
One could then, for example, say that (cid:16)p(cid:17) signi(cid:28)es in the true
way what (cid:16)
∼p(cid:17)
signi(cid:28)es in the false way, etc.
4.062 Can we not make ourselves understood by means of false propo-
sitions as hitherto with true ones, so long as we know that they
are meant to be false? No! For a proposition is true, if what
we assert by means of it is the case; and if by (cid:16)p(cid:17) we mean ∼p,
and what we mean is the case, then (cid:16)p(cid:17) in the new conception
is true and not false.
4.0621 That, however, the signs (cid:16)p(cid:17) and (cid:16) ∼p(cid:17) can say the same thing is
∼
important, for it shows that the sign (cid:16) (cid:17) corresponds to nothing
in reality.
That negation occurs in a proposition, is no characteristic of
its sense ( ∼∼p = p).
The propositions (cid:16)p(cid:17) and (cid:16) ∼p(cid:17) have opposite senses, but to
them corresponds one and the same reality.
4.063 An illustration to explain the concept of truth. A black spot on
white paper; the form of the spot can be described by saying
of each point of the plane whether it is white or black. To the
fact that a point is black corresponds a positive fact; to the fact
that a point is white (not black), a negative fact. If I indicate
a point of the plane (a truth-value in Frege’s terminology), this
corresponds to the assumption proposed for judgment, etc. etc.
But to be able to say that a point is black or white, I must
(cid:28)rst know under what conditions a point is called white or black;
in order to be able to say (cid:16)p(cid:17) is true (or false) I must have
determined under what conditions I call (cid:16)p(cid:17) true, and thereby I
determine the sense of the proposition.
The point at which the simile breaks down is this: we can
indicate a point on the paper, without knowing what white and
black are; but to a proposition without a sense corresponds noth-
ing at all, for it signi(cid:28)es no thing (truth-value) whose properties
43

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
are called (cid:16)false(cid:17) or (cid:16)true(cid:17); the verb of the proposition is not (cid:16)is
true(cid:17) or (cid:16)is false(cid:17)(cid:22)as Frege thought(cid:22)but that which (cid:16)is true(cid:17)
must already contain the verb.
4.064 Every proposition must already have a sense; assertion cannot
give it a sense, for what it asserts is the sense itself. And the
same holds of denial, etc.
4.0641 One could say, the denial is already related to the logical place
determined by the proposition that is denied.
The denying proposition determines a logical place other
than does the proposition denied.
The denying proposition determines a logical place, with the
help of the logical place of the proposition denied, by saying that
it lies outside the latter place.
That one can deny again the denied proposition, shows that
what is denied is already a proposition and not merely the pre-
liminary to a proposition.
4.1 A proposition presents the existence and non-existence of atomic
facts.
4.11 The totality of true propositions is the total natural science (or
the totality of the natural sciences).
4.111 Philosophy is not one of the natural sciences.
(The word (cid:16)philosophy(cid:17) must mean something which stands
above or below, but not beside the natural sciences.)
4.112 The object of philosophy is the logical clari(cid:28)cation of thoughts.
Philosophy is not a theory but an activity.
A philosophical work consists essentially of elucidations.
The result of philosophy is not a number of (cid:16)philosophical
propositions(cid:17), but to make propositions clear.
Philosophy should make clear and delimit sharply the
thoughts which otherwise are, as it were, opaque and blurred.
4.1121 Psychology is no nearer related to philosophy, than is any other
natural science.
The theory of knowledge is the philosophy of psychology.
Does not my study of sign-language correspond to the study
of thought processes which philosophers held to be so essential
44

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
to the philosophy of logic? Only they got entangled for the most
part in unessential psychological investigations, and there is an
analogous danger for my method.
4.1122 The Darwinian theory has no more to do with philosophy than
has any other hypothesis of natural science.
4.113 Philosophy limits the disputable sphere of natural science.
4.114 It should limit the thinkable and thereby the unthinkable.
It should limit the unthinkable from within through the
thinkable.
4.115 It will mean the unspeakable by clearly displaying the speakable.
4.116 Everything that can be thought at all can be thought clearly.
Everything that can be said can be said clearly.
4.12 Propositions can represent the whole reality, but they cannot
represent what they must have in common with reality in order
to be able to represent it(cid:22)the logical form.
To be able to represent the logical form, we should have to
be able to put ourselves with the propositions outside logic, that
is outside the world.
4.121 Propositions cannot represent the logical form: this mirrors itself
in the propositions.
That which mirrors itself in language, language cannot rep-
resent.
That which expresses itself in language, we cannot express
by language.
The propositions show the logical form of reality.
They exhibit it.
4.1211 Thus a proposition (cid:16)fa(cid:17) shows that in its sense the object a
occurs, two propositions (cid:16)fa(cid:17) and (cid:16)ga(cid:17) that they are both about
the same object.
If two propositions contradict one another, this is shown by
their structure; similarly if one follows from another, etc.
4.1212 What can be shown cannot be said.
4.1213 Now we understand our feeling that we are in possession of the
right logical conception, if only all is right in our symbolism.
45

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
4.122 We can speak in a certain sense of formal properties of objects
and atomic facts, or of properties of the structure of facts, and
in the same sense of formal relations and relations of structures.
(Instead of property of the structure I also say (cid:16)internal prop-
erty(cid:17); instead of relation of structures (cid:16)internal relation(cid:17).
I introduce these expressions in order to show the reason
for the confusion, very widespread among philosophers, between
internal relations and proper (external) relations.)
The holding of such internal properties and relations cannot,
however, be asserted by propositions, but it shows itself in the
propositions, which present the atomic facts and treat of the
objects in question.
4.1221 An internal property of a fact we also call a feature of this fact.
(In the sense in which we speak of facial features.)
4.123 A property is internal if it is unthinkable that its object does
not possess it.
(This blue colour and that stand in the internal relation of
brighter and darker eo ipso. It is unthinkable that these two
objects should not stand in this relation.)
(Here to the shifting use of the words (cid:16)property(cid:17) and (cid:16)rela-
tion(cid:17) there corresponds the shifting use of the word (cid:16)object(cid:17).)
4.124 The existence of an internal property of a possible state of a(cid:27)airs
is not expressed by a proposition, but it expresses itself in the
proposition which presents that state of a(cid:27)airs, by an internal
property of this proposition.
It would be as senseless to ascribe a formal property to a
proposition as to deny it the formal property.
4.1241 One cannot distinguish forms from one another by saying that
one has this property but the other that: for this assumes that
there is a sense in asserting either property of either form.
4.125 The existence of an internal relation between possible states of
a(cid:27)airs expresses itself in language by an internal relation be-
tween the propositions presenting them.
4.1251 Here the disputed question (cid:16)whether all relations are internal or
external(cid:17) disappears.
46

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
4.1252 Series which are ordered by internal relations I call formal series.
The series of numbers is ordered not by an external, but by
an internal relation.
Similarly the series of propositions (cid:16)aRb(cid:17),
“(∃x) : aRx . xRb(cid:17),
“(∃x,y) : aRx . aRy . yRb(cid:17), etc.
(If b stands in one of these relations to a, I call b a successor
of a.)
4.126 In the sense in which we speak of formal properties we can now
speak also of formal concepts.
(I introduce this expression in order to make clear the confu-
sion of formal concepts with proper concepts which runs through
the whole of the old logic.)
That anything falls under a formal concept as an object be-
longing to it, cannot be expressed by a proposition. But it shows
itself in the sign of this object itself. (The name shows that it
signi(cid:28)es an object, the numerical sign that it signi(cid:28)es a number,
etc.)
Formal concepts cannot, like proper concepts, be presented
by a function.
For their characteristics, the formal properties, are not ex-
pressed by the functions.
The expression of a formal property is a feature of certain
symbols.
The sign that signi(cid:28)es the characteristics of a formal con-
cept is, therefore, a characteristic feature of all symbols, whose
meanings fall under the concept.
The expression of the formal concept is therefore a proposi-
tional variable in which only this characteristic feature is con-
stant.
4.127 The propositional variable signi(cid:28)es the formal concept, and its
values signify the objects which fall under this concept.
4.1271 Every variable is the sign of a formal concept.
For every variable presents a constant form, which all its
values possess, and which can be conceived as a formal property
of these values.
47

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
4.1272 So the variable name (cid:16)x(cid:17) is the proper sign of the pseudo-concept
object.
Wherever the word (cid:16)object(cid:17) ((cid:16)thing(cid:17), (cid:16)entity(cid:17), etc.) is rightly
used, it is expressed in logical symbolism by the variable name.
For example in the proposition (cid:16)there are two objects which
...(cid:17), by (cid:16)(∃x,y) ...(cid:17).
Wherever it is used otherwise, i.e. as a proper concept word,
there arise senseless pseudo-propositions.
So one cannot, e.g. say (cid:16)There are objects(cid:17) as one says (cid:16)There
are books(cid:17). Nor (cid:16)There are 100 objects(cid:17) or (cid:16)There are ℵ ob-
0
jects(cid:17). And it is senseless to speak of the number of all objects.
The same holds of the words (cid:16)Complex(cid:17), (cid:16)Fact(cid:17), (cid:16)Function(cid:17),
(cid:16)Number(cid:17), etc.
They all signify formal concepts and are presented in logical
symbolism by variables, not by functions or classes (as Frege
and Russell thought).
Expressions like (cid:16)1 is a number(cid:17), (cid:16)there is only one number
nought(cid:17), and all like them are senseless.
(It is as senseless to say, (cid:16)there is only one 1(cid:17) as it would be
to say: 2 + 2 is at 3 o’clock equal to 4.)
4.12721 The formal concept is already given with an object, which falls
under it. One cannot, therefore, introduce both, the objects
which fall under a formal concept and the formal concept it-
self, as primitive ideas. One cannot, therefore, e.g. introduce
(as Russell does) the concept of function and also special func-
tions as primitive ideas; or the concept of number and de(cid:28)nite
numbers.
4.1273 If we want to express in logical symbolism the general propo-
sition (cid:16)b is a successor of a(cid:17) we need for this an expression for
the general term of the formal series: aRb, (∃x) : aRx . xRb,
(∃x,y) : aRx.xRy .yRb, ... The general term of a formal series
can only be expressed by a variable, for the concept symbolized
by (cid:16)term of this formal series(cid:17) is a formal concept. (This Frege
and Russell overlooked; the way in which they express general
propositions like the above is, therefore, false; it contains a vi-
cious circle.)
We can determine the general term of the formal series by
48

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
giving its (cid:28)rst term and the general form of the operation, which
generates the following term out of the preceding proposition.
4.1274 The question about the existence of a formal concept is senseless.
For no proposition can answer such a question.
(For example, one cannot ask: (cid:16)Are there unanalysable sub-
ject-predicate propositions?(cid:17))
4.128 The logical forms are anumerical.
Therefore there are in logic no pre-eminent numbers, and
therefore there is no philosophical monism or dualism, etc.
4.2 The sense of a proposition is its agreement and disagreement
with the possibilities of the existence and non-existence of the
atomic facts.
4.21 The simplest proposition, the elementary proposition, asserts
the existence of an atomic fact.
4.211 It is a sign of an elementary proposition, that no elementary
proposition can contradict it.
4.22 The elementary proposition consists of names. It is a connexion,
a concatenation, of names.
4.221 It is obvious that in the analysis of propositions we must come
to elementary propositions, which consist of names in immediate
combination.
The question arises here, how the propositional connexion
comes to be.
4.2211 Even if the world is in(cid:28)nitely complex, so that every fact consists
of an in(cid:28)nite number of atomic facts and every atomic fact is
composed of an in(cid:28)nite number of objects, even then there must
be objects and atomic facts.
4.23 The name occurs in the proposition only in the context of the
elementary proposition.
4.24 The names are the simple symbols, I indicate them by single
letters (x, y, z).
The elementary proposition I write as function of the names,
in the form (cid:16)fx(cid:17), (cid:16)ϕ(x,y)(cid:17), etc.
Or I indicate it by the letters p, q, r.
49

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
4.241 If I use two signs with one and the same meaning, I express this
by putting between them the sign (cid:16)=(cid:17).
(cid:16)a = b(cid:17) means then, that the sign (cid:16)a(cid:17) is replaceable by the
sign (cid:16)b(cid:17).
(If I introduce by an equation a new sign (cid:16)b(cid:17), by determining
that it shall replace a previously known sign (cid:16)a(cid:17), I write the
equation(cid:22)de(cid:28)nition(cid:22)(like Russell) in the form (cid:16)a = b Def.(cid:17). A
de(cid:28)nition is a symbolic rule.)
4.242 Expressions of the form (cid:16)a = b(cid:17) are therefore only expedients
in presentation: They assert nothing about the meaning of the
signs (cid:16)a(cid:17) and (cid:16)b(cid:17).
4.243 Can we understand two names without knowing whether they
signify the same thing or two di(cid:27)erent things? Can we under-
stand a proposition in which two names occur, without knowing
if they mean the same or di(cid:27)erent things?
If I know the meaning of an English and a synonymous Ger-
man word, it is impossible for me not to know that they are
synonymous, it is impossible for me not to be able to translate
them into one another.
Expressions like (cid:16)a = a(cid:17), or expressions deduced from these
are neither elementary propositions nor otherwise signi(cid:28)cant
signs. (This will be shown later.)
4.25 If the elementary proposition is true, the atomic fact exists; if it
is false the atomic fact does not exist.
4.26 The speci(cid:28)cation of all true elementary propositions describes
the world completely. The world is completely described by the
speci(cid:28)cation of all elementary propositions plus the speci(cid:28)cation,
which of them are true and which false.
4.27 With regard to the existence of n atomic facts there are K =
n
n
(cid:80) (cid:0)n(cid:1)
possibilities.
ν
ν=0
It is possible for all combinations of atomic facts to exist,
and the others not to exist.
4.28 To these combinations correspond the same number of possibili-
ties of the truth(cid:22)and falsehood(cid:22)of n elementary propositions.
4.3 The truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions mean the
50

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
possibilities of the existence and non-existence of the atomic
facts.
4.31 The truth-possibilities can be presented by schemata of the fol-
lowing kind ((cid:16)T(cid:17) means (cid:16)true(cid:17), (cid:16)F(cid:17) (cid:16)false(cid:17). The rows of T’s and
F’s under the row of the elementary propositions mean their
truth-possibilities in an easily intelligible symbolism).
p q r p q p
T T T T T T
F T T F T F
T F T T F
T T F F F
F F T
F T F
T F F
F F F
4.4 A proposition is the expression of agreement and disagreement
with the truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions.
4.41 The truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions are the
conditions of the truth and falsehood of the propositions.
4.411 It seems probable even at (cid:28)rst sight that the introduction of the
elementary propositions is fundamental for the comprehension of
the other kinds of propositions. Indeed the comprehension of the
general propositions depends palpably on that of the elementary
propositions.
4.42 With regard to the agreement and disagreement of a proposition
with the truth-possibilities of n elementary propositions there
are
(cid:80)
Kn
(cid:0)Kn (cid:1)
= L possibilities.
κ n
κ=0
4.43 Agreement with the truth-possibilities can be expressed by co-
ordinating with them in the schema the mark (cid:16)T(cid:17) (true).
Absence of this mark means disagreement.
4.431 The expression of the agreement and disagreement with the
truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions expresses the
truth-conditions of the proposition.
51

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
The proposition is the expression of its truth-conditions.
(Frege has therefore quite rightly put them at the beginning,
as explaining the signs of his logical symbolism. Only Frege’s
explanation of the truth-concept is false: if (cid:16)the true(cid:17) and (cid:16)the
false(cid:17) were real objects and the arguments in
∼p,
etc., then
the sense of
∼p
would by no means be determined by Frege’s
determination.)
4.44 The sign which arises from the co-ordination of that mark (cid:16)T(cid:17)
with the truth-possibilities is a propositional sign.
4.441 It is clear that to the complex of the signs (cid:16)F(cid:17) and (cid:16)T(cid:17) no object
(or complex of objects) corresponds; any more than to horizontal
and vertical lines or to brackets. There are no (cid:16)logical objects(cid:17).
Something analogous holds of course for all signs, which ex-
press the same as the schemata of (cid:16)T(cid:17) and (cid:16)F(cid:17).
4.442 Thus e.g.
(cid:16) p q
T T T
F T T
T F
F F T (cid:17)
is a propositional sign.
(Frege’s assertion sign (cid:16)⊢(cid:17) is logically altogether meaningless;
in Frege (and Russell) it only shows that these authors hold as
true the propositions marked in this way.
(cid:16)⊢(cid:17) belongs therefore to the propositions no more than does
the number of the proposition. A proposition cannot possibly
assert of itself that it is true.)
If the sequence of the truth-possibilities in the schema is once
for all determined by a rule of combination, then the last column
is by itself an expression of the truth-conditions. If we write this
column as a row the propositional sign becomes: (cid:16)(TT(cid:21)T)(p, q)(cid:17),
or more plainly: (cid:16)(TTFT)(p, q)(cid:17).
(The number of places in the left-hand bracket is determined
by the number of terms in the right-hand bracket.)
4.45 For n elementary propositions there are L possible groups of
n
truth-conditions.
52

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
The groups of truth-conditions which belong to the truth-
possibilities of a number of elementary propositions can be or-
dered in a series.
4.46 Among the possible groups of truth-conditions there are two
extreme cases.
In the one case the proposition is true for all the truth-pos-
sibilities of the elementary propositions. We say that the truth-
conditions are tautological.
In the second case the proposition is false for all the truth-
possibilities. The truth-conditions are self-contradictory.
In the (cid:28)rst case we call the proposition a tautology, in the
second case a contradiction.
4.461 The proposition shows what it says, the tautology and the con-
tradiction that they say nothing.
The tautology has no truth-conditions, for it is uncondition-
ally true; and the contradiction is on no condition true.
Tautology and contradiction are without sense.
(Like the point from which two arrows go out in opposite
directions.)
(I know, e.g. nothing about the weather, when I know that
it rains or does not rain.)
4.4611 Tautology and contradiction are, however, not senseless; they
are part of the symbolism, in the same way that (cid:16)0(cid:17) is part of
the symbolism of Arithmetic.
4.462 Tautology and contradiction are not pictures of the reality. They
present no possible state of a(cid:27)airs. For the one allows every
possible state of a(cid:27)airs, the other none.
In the tautology the conditions of agreement with the world
(cid:22)the presenting relations(cid:22)cancel one another, so that it stands
in no presenting relation to reality.
4.463 The truth-conditions determine the range, which is left to the
facts by the proposition.
(The proposition, the picture, the model, are in a negative
sense like a solid body, which restricts the free movement of
another: in a positive sense, like the space limited by solid sub-
stance, in which a body may be placed.)
53

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
Tautology leaves to reality the whole in(cid:28)nite logical space;
contradiction (cid:28)lls the whole logical space and leaves no point to
reality. Neither of them, therefore, can in any way determine
reality.
4.464 The truth of tautology is certain, of propositions possible, of
contradiction impossible. (Certain, possible, impossible: here
we have an indication of that gradation which we need in the
theory of probability.)
4.465 The logical product of a tautology and a proposition says the
same as the proposition. Therefore that product is identical
with the proposition. For the essence of the symbol cannot be
altered without altering its sense.
4.466 To a de(cid:28)nite logical combination of signs corresponds a de(cid:28)nite
logical combination of their meanings; every arbitrary combina-
tion only corresponds to the unconnected signs.
That is, propositions which are true for every state of a(cid:27)airs
cannot be combinations of signs at all, for otherwise there could
only correspond to them de(cid:28)nite combinations of objects.
(And to no logical combination corresponds no combination
of the objects.)
Tautology and contradiction are the limiting cases of the
combinations of symbols, namely their dissolution.
4.4661 Of course the signs are also combined with one another in the
tautology and contradiction, i.e. they stand in relations to one
another, but these relations are meaningless, unessential to the
symbol.
4.5 Now it appears to be possible to give the most general form of
proposition; i.e. to give a description of the propositions of some
one sign language, so that every possible sense can be expressed
by a symbol, which falls under the description, and so that every
symbol which falls under the description can express a sense, if
the meanings of the names are chosen accordingly.
It is clear that in the description of the most general form
of proposition only what is essential to it may be described(cid:22)
otherwise it would not be the most general form.
That there is a general form is proved by the fact that there
54

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
cannot be a proposition whose form could not have been foreseen
(i.e. constructed). The general form of proposition is: Such and
such is the case.
4.51 Suppose all elementary propositions were given me: then we
can simply ask: what propositions I can build out of them. And
these are all propositions and so are they limited.
4.52 The propositions are everything which follows from the totality
of all elementary propositions (of course also from the fact that
it is the totality of them all). (So, in some sense, one could
say, that all propositions are generalizations of the elementary
propositions.)
4.53 The general propositional form is a variable.
5 Propositions are truth-functions of elementary propositions.
(An elementary proposition is a truth-function of itself.)
5.01 The elementary propositions are the truth-arguments of propo-
sitions.
5.02 It is natural to confuse the arguments of functions with the
indices of names. For I recognize the meaning of the sign con-
taining it from the argument just as much as from the index.
In Russell’s (cid:16)+ (cid:17), for example, (cid:16)c(cid:17) is an index which indicates
c
that the whole sign is the addition sign for cardinal numbers.
But this way of symbolizing depends on arbitrary agreement,
and one could choose a simple sign instead of (cid:16)+ (cid:17): but in (cid:16) ∼p(cid:17)
c
(cid:16)p(cid:17) is not an index but an argument; the sense of (cid:16) ∼p(cid:17) cannot
be understood, unless the sense of (cid:16)p(cid:17) has previously been un-
derstood. (In the name Julius C(cid:230)sar, Julius is an index. The
index is always part of a description of the object to whose name
we attach it, e.g. The C(cid:230)sar of the Julian gens.)
The confusion of argument and index is, if I am not mistaken,
at the root of Frege’s theory of the meaning of propositions and
functions. For Frege the propositions of logic were names and
their arguments the indices of these names.
5.1 The truth-functions can be ordered in series.
That is the foundation of the theory of probability.
55

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
5.101 The truth-functions of every number of elementary propositions
can be written in a schema of the following kind:
(TTTT)(p,q) Tautology (if p then p, and if q then q) [p ⊃ p . q ⊃ q]
(FTTT)(p,q) in words: Not both p and q. [∼(p . q)]
(TFTT)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) If q then p. [q ⊃ p]
(TTFT)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) If p then q. [p ⊃ q]
(TTTF)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) p or q. [p ∨ q]
(FFTT)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) Not q. [∼q]
(FTFT)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) Not p. [∼p]
(FTTF)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) p or q, but not both. [p . ∼q : ∨ : q . ∼p]
(TFFT)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) If p, then q; and if q, then p. [p ≡ q]
(TFTF)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) p
(TTFF)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) q
(FFFT)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) Neither p nor q. [∼p . ∼q or p | q]
(FFTF)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) p and not q. [p . ∼q]
(FTFF)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) q and not p. [q . ∼p]
(TFFF)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) p and q. [p . q]
(FFFF)(p,q) Contradiction (p and not p; and q and not q.) [p . ∼p . q . ∼q]
Those truth-possibilities of its truth-arguments, which verify
the proposition, I shall call its truth-grounds.
5.11 If the truth-grounds which are common to a number of proposi-
tions are all also truth-grounds of some one proposition, we say
that the truth of this proposition follows from the truth of those
propositions.
5.12 In particular the truth of a proposition p follows from that of a
proposition q, if all the truth-grounds of the second are truth-
grounds of the (cid:28)rst.
5.121 The truth-grounds of q are contained in those of p; p follows
from q.
5.122 If p follows from q, the sense of (cid:16)p(cid:17) is contained in that of (cid:16)q(cid:17).
5.123 If a god creates a world in which certain propositions are true, he
creates thereby also a world in which all propositions consequent
on them are true. And similarly he could not create a world in
which the proposition (cid:16)p(cid:17) is true without creating all its objects.
5.124 A proposition asserts every proposition which follows from it.
5.1241 (cid:16)p.q(cid:17) is one of the propositions which assert (cid:16)p(cid:17) and at the same
time one of the propositions which assert (cid:16)q(cid:17).
56

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
Two propositions are opposed to one another if there is no
signi(cid:28)cant proposition which asserts them both.
Every proposition which contradicts another, denies it.
5.13 That the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of other
propositions, we perceive from the structure of the propositions.
5.131 If the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of others,
this expresses itself in relations in which the forms of these prop-
ositions stand to one another, and we do not need to put them
in these relations (cid:28)rst by connecting them with one another in
a proposition; for these relations are internal, and exist as soon
as, and by the very fact that, the propositions exist.
5.1311 When we conclude from p ∨ q and ∼p to q the relation between
the forms of the propositions (cid:16)p ∨ q(cid:17) and (cid:16) ∼p(cid:17) is here concealed
by the method of symbolizing. But if we write, e.g. instead of
(cid:16)p ∨ q(cid:17) (cid:16)p | q . | . p | q(cid:17) and instead of (cid:16) ∼p(cid:17) (cid:16)p | p(cid:17) (p | q = neither
p nor q), then the inner connexion becomes obvious.
(The fact that we can infer fa from (x) . fx shows that gen-
erality is present also in the symbol (cid:16)(x) . fx(cid:17).
5.132 If p follows from q, I can conclude from q to p; infer p from q.
The method of inference is to be understood from the two
propositions alone.
Only they themselves can justify the inference.
Laws of inference, which(cid:22)as in Frege and Russell(cid:22)are to
justify the conclusions, are senseless and would be super(cid:29)uous.
5.133 All inference takes place a priori.
5.134 From an elementary proposition no other can be inferred.
5.135 In no way can an inference be made from the existence of one
state of a(cid:27)airs to the existence of another entirely di(cid:27)erent from
it.
5.136 There is no causal nexus which justi(cid:28)es such an inference.
5.1361 The events of the future cannot be inferred from those of the
present.
Superstition is the belief in the causal nexus.
5.1362 The freedom of the will consists in the fact that future actions
57

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
cannot be known now. We could only know them if causality
were an inner necessity, like that of logical deduction.(cid:22)The
connexion of knowledge and what is known is that of logical
necessity.
((cid:16)A knows that p is the case(cid:17) is senseless if p is a tautology.)
5.1363 If from the fact that a proposition is obvious to us it does not
follow that it is true, then obviousness is no justi(cid:28)cation for our
belief in its truth.
5.14 If a proposition follows from another, then the latter says more
than the former, the former less than the latter.
5.141 If p follows from q and q from p then they are one and the same
proposition.
5.142 A tautology follows from all propositions: it says nothing.
5.143 Contradiction is something shared by propositions, which no
proposition has in common with another. Tautology is that
which is shared by all propositions, which have nothing in com-
mon with one another.
Contradiction vanishes so to speak outside, tautology inside
all propositions.
Contradiction is the external limit of the propositions, tau-
tology their substanceless centre.
5.15 If T is the number of the truth-grounds of the proposition (cid:16)r(cid:17),
r
T the number of those truth-grounds of the proposition (cid:16)s(cid:17)
rs
which are at the same time truth-grounds of (cid:16)r(cid:17), then we call
the ratio T : T the measure of the probability which the prop-
rs r
osition (cid:16)r(cid:17) gives to the proposition (cid:16)s(cid:17).
5.151 Suppose in a schema like that above in No. 5.101 T is the num-
r
ber of the (cid:16)T(cid:17)’s in the proposition r, T the number of those
rs
(cid:16)T(cid:17)’s in the proposition s, which stand in the same columns as
(cid:16)T(cid:17)’s of the proposition r; then the proposition r gives to the
proposition s the probability T : T .
rs r
5.1511 There is no special object peculiar to probability propositions.
5.152 Propositions which have no truth-arguments in common with
one another we call independent.
58

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
Independent propositions (e.g. any two elementary proposi-
tions) give to one another the probability 1.
2
If p follows from q, the proposition q gives to the proposition
p the probability 1. The certainty of logical conclusion is a
limiting case of probability.
(Application to tautology and contradiction.)
5.153 A proposition is in itself neither probable nor improbable. An
event occurs or does not occur, there is no middle course.
5.154 In an urn there are equal numbers of white and black balls (and
no others). I draw one ball after another and put them back in
the urn. Then I can determine by the experiment that the num-
bers of the black and white balls which are drawn approximate
as the drawing continues.
So this is not a mathematical fact.
If then, I say, It is equally probable that I should draw a
white and a black ball, this means, All the circumstances known
to me (including the natural laws hypothetically assumed) give
to the occurrence of the one event no more probability than to
the occurrence of the other. That is they give(cid:22)as can easily be
understood from the above explanations(cid:22)to each the probabil-
ity 1.
2
What I can verify by the experiment is that the occurrence of
the two events is independent of the circumstances with which
I have no closer acquaintance.
5.155 The unit of the probability proposition is: The circumstances(cid:22)
with which I am not further acquainted(cid:22)give to the occurrence
of a de(cid:28)nite event such and such a degree of probability.
5.156 Probability is a generalization.
It involves a general description of a propositional form. Only
in default of certainty do we need probability.
If we are not completely acquainted with a fact, but know
something about its form.
(A proposition can, indeed, be an incomplete picture of a
certain state of a(cid:27)airs, but it is always a complete picture.)
The probability proposition is, as it were, an extract from
other propositions.
59

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
5.2 The structures of propositions stand to one another in internal
relations.
5.21 We can bring out these internal relations in our manner of ex-
pression, by presenting a proposition as the result of an opera-
tion which produces it from other propositions (the bases of the
operation).
5.22 The operation is the expression of a relation between the struc-
tures of its result and its bases.
5.23 The operation is that which must happen to a proposition in
order to make another out of it.
5.231 And that will naturally depend on their formal properties, on
the internal similarity of their forms.
5.232 The internal relation which orders a series is equivalent to the
operation by which one term arises from another.
5.233 The (cid:28)rst place in which an operation can occur is where a prop-
osition arises from another in a logically signi(cid:28)cant way; i.e.
where the logical construction of the proposition begins.
5.234 The truth-functions of elementary propositions, are results of
operations which have the elementary propositions as bases. (I
call these operations, truth-operations.)
5.2341 The sense of a truth-function of p is a function of the sense of p.
Denial, logical addition, logical multiplication, etc. etc., are
operations.
(Denial reverses the sense of a proposition.)
5.24 An operation shows itself in a variable; it shows how we can
proceed from one form of proposition to another.
It gives expression to the di(cid:27)erence between the forms.
(And that which is common to the bases, and the result of
an operation, is the bases themselves.)
5.241 The operation does not characterize a form but only the di(cid:27)er-
ence between forms.
5.242 The same operation which makes (cid:16)q(cid:17) from (cid:16)p(cid:17), makes (cid:16)r(cid:17) from
(cid:16)q(cid:17), and so on. This can only be expressed by the fact that
(cid:16)p(cid:17), (cid:16)q(cid:17), (cid:16)r(cid:17), etc., are variables which give general expression to
certain formal relations.
60

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
5.25 The occurrence of an operation does not characterize the sense
of a proposition.
For an operation does not assert anything; only its result
does, and this depends on the bases of the operation.
(Operation and function must not be confused with one an-
other.)
5.251 A function cannot be its own argument, but the result of an
operation can be its own basis.
5.252 Only in this way is the progress from term to term in a formal
series possible (from type to type in the hierarchy of Russell
and Whitehead). (Russell and Whitehead have not admitted
the possibility of this progress but have made use of it all the
same.)
5.2521 The repeated application of an operation to its own result I call
its successive application ((cid:16)O′O′O′a(cid:17) is the result of the threefold
successive application of (cid:16)O′ξ(cid:17) to (cid:16)a(cid:17)).
In a similar sense I speak of the successive application of
several operations to a number of propositions.
5.2522 The general term of the formal series a,O′a,O′O′a, .... I write
thus: (cid:16)[a, x, O′x](cid:17). This expression in brackets is a variable. The
(cid:28)rst term of the expression is the beginning of the formal series,
the second the form of an arbitrary term x of the series, and
the third the form of that term of the series which immediately
follows x.
5.2523 The concept of the successive application of an operation is
equivalent to the concept (cid:16)and so on(cid:17).
5.253 One operation can reverse the e(cid:27)ect of another. Operations can
cancel one another.
5.254 Operations can vanish (e.g. denial in (cid:16) ∼∼p(cid:17), ∼∼p = p).
5.3 All propositions are results of truth-operations on the elemen-
tary propositions.
The truth-operation is the way in which a truth-function
arises from elementary propositions.
According to the nature of truth-operations, in the same way
as out of elementary propositions arise their truth-functions,
61

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
from truth-functions arises a new one. Every truth-operation
creates from truth-functions of elementary propositions another
truth-function of elementary propositions, i.e. a proposition.
The result of every truth-operation on the results of truth-oper-
ations on elementary propositions is also the result of one truth-
operation on elementary propositions.
Every proposition is the result of truth-operations on ele-
mentary propositions.
5.31 The Schemata No. 4.31 are also signi(cid:28)cant, if (cid:16)p(cid:17), (cid:16)q(cid:17), (cid:16)r(cid:17), etc.
are not elementary propositions.
And it is easy to see that the propositional sign in No. 4.442
expresses one truth-function of elementary propositions even
when (cid:16)p(cid:17) and (cid:16)q(cid:17) are truth-functions of elementary propositions.
5.32 All truth-functions are results of the successive application of a
(cid:28)nite number of truth-operations to elementary propositions.
5.4 Here it becomes clear that there are no such things as (cid:16)logical
objects(cid:17) or (cid:16)logical constants(cid:17) (in the sense of Frege and Russell).
5.41 For all those results of truth-operations on truth-functions are
identical, which are one and the same truth-function of elemen-
tary propositions.
5.42 That ∨, ⊃, etc., are not relations in the sense of right and left,
etc., is obvious.
The possibility of crosswise de(cid:28)nition of the logical (cid:16)primitive
signs(cid:17) of Frege and Russell shows by itself that these are not
primitive signs and that they signify no relations.
And it is obvious that the (cid:16)⊃(cid:17) which we de(cid:28)ne by means of
(cid:16) ∼ (cid:17) and (cid:16)∨(cid:17) is identical with that by which we de(cid:28)ne (cid:16)∨(cid:17) with
the help of (cid:16) ∼ (cid:17), and that this (cid:16)∨(cid:17) is the same as the (cid:28)rst, and
so on.
5.43 That from a fact p an in(cid:28)nite number of others should follow,
namely
∼∼p, ∼∼∼∼p,
etc., is indeed hardly to be believed, and
it is no less wonderful that the in(cid:28)nite number of propositions of
logic (of mathematics) should follow from half a dozen (cid:16)primitive
propositions(cid:17).
But all propositions of logic say the same thing. That is,
nothing.
62

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
5.44 Truth-functions are not material functions.
If e.g. an a(cid:30)rmation can be produced by repeated denial, is
the denial(cid:22)in any sense(cid:22)contained in the a(cid:30)rmation?
Does (cid:16) ∼∼p(cid:17) deny ∼p, or does it a(cid:30)rm p; or both?
The proposition (cid:16)
∼∼p(cid:17)
does not treat of denial as an object,
but the possibility of denial is already prejudged in a(cid:30)rmation.
And if there was an object called (cid:16)
∼
(cid:17), then (cid:16)
∼∼p(cid:17)
would
have to say something other than (cid:16)p(cid:17). For the one proposition
∼
would then treat of , the other would not.
5.441 This disappearance of the apparent logical constants also occurs
if (cid:16) ∼(∃x).∼fx(cid:17) says the same as (cid:16)(x).fx(cid:17), or (cid:16)(∃x).fx.x = a(cid:17)
the same as (cid:16)fa(cid:17).
5.442 If a proposition is given to us then the results of all truth-
operations which have it as their basis are given with it.
5.45 If there are logical primitive signs a correct logic must make clear
their position relative to one another and justify their existence.
The construction of logic out of its primitive signs must become
clear.
5.451 If logic has primitive ideas these must be independent of one an-
other. If a primitive idea is introduced it must be introduced in
all contexts in which it occurs at all. One cannot therefore intro-
duce it for one context and then again for another. For example,
if denial is introduced, we must understand it in propositions of
the form (cid:16)
∼p(cid:17),
just as in propositions like (cid:16)
∼(p∨q)(cid:17), (cid:16)(∃x).∼fx(cid:17)
and others. We may not (cid:28)rst introduce it for one class of cases
and then for another, for it would then remain doubtful whether
its meaning in the two cases was the same, and there would be
no reason to use the same way of symbolizing in the two cases.
(In short, what Frege ((cid:16)Grundgesetze der Arithmetik(cid:17)) has
said about the introduction of signs by de(cid:28)nitions holds, mutatis
mutandis, for the introduction of primitive signs also.)
5.452 The introduction of a new expedient in the symbolism of logic
must always be an event full of consequences. No new symbol
may be introduced in logic in brackets or in the margin(cid:22)with,
so to speak, an entirely innocent face.
(Thus in the (cid:16)Principia Mathematica(cid:17) of Russell and White-
63

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
head there occur de(cid:28)nitions and primitive propositions in words.
Why suddenly words here? This would need a justi(cid:28)cation.
There was none, and can be none for the process is actually
not allowed.)
But if the introduction of a new expedient has proved nec-
essary in one place, we must immediately ask: Where is this
expedient always to be used? Its position in logic must be made
clear.
5.453 All numbers in logic must be capable of justi(cid:28)cation.
Or rather it must become plain that there are no numbers
in logic.
There are no pre-eminent numbers.
5.454 In logic there is no side by side, there can be no classi(cid:28)cation.
In logic there cannot be a more general and a more special.
5.4541 The solution of logical problems must be simple for they set the
standard of simplicity.
Men have always thought that there must be a sphere of
questions whose answers(cid:22)a priori(cid:22)are symmetrical and united
into a closed regular structure.
A sphere in which the proposition, simplex sigillum veri, is
valid.
5.46 When we have rightly introduced the logical signs, the sense of
all their combinations has been already introduced with them:
therefore not only (cid:16)p ∨ q(cid:17) but also (cid:16) ∼(p ∨ ∼q)(cid:17), etc. etc. We
should then already have introduced the e(cid:27)ect of all possible
combinations of brackets; and it would then have become clear
that the proper general primitive signs are not (cid:16)p∨q(cid:17), (cid:16)(∃x).fx(cid:17),
etc., but the most general form of their combinations.
5.461 The apparently unimportant fact that the apparent relations
like ∨ and ⊃ need brackets(cid:22)unlike real relations is of great
importance.
The use of brackets with these apparent primitive signs shows
that these are not the real primitive signs; and nobody of course
would believe that the brackets have meaning by themselves.
5.4611 Logical operation signs are punctuations.
64

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
5.47 It is clear that everything which can be said beforehand about
the form of all propositions at all can be said on one occasion.
For all logical operations are already contained in the elemen-
tary proposition. For (cid:16)fa(cid:17) says the same as (cid:16)(∃x) . fx . x = a(cid:17).
Where there is composition, there is argument and function,
and where these are, all logical constants already are.
One could say: the one logical constant is that which all
propositions, according to their nature, have in common with
one another.
That however is the general form of proposition.
5.471 The general form of proposition is the essence of proposition.
5.4711 To give the essence of proposition means to give the essence of
all description, therefore the essence of the world.
5.472 The description of the most general propositional form is the
description of the one and only general primitive sign in logic.
5.473 Logic must take care of itself.
A possible sign must also be able to signify. Everything
which is possible in logic is also permitted. ((cid:16)Socrates is identi-
cal(cid:17) means nothing because there is no property which is called
(cid:16)identical(cid:17). The proposition is senseless because we have not
made some arbitrary determination, not because the symbol is
in itself unpermissible.)
In a certain sense we cannot make mistakes in logic.
5.4731 Self-evidence, of which Russell has said so much, can only be
discarded in logic by language itself preventing every logical mis-
take. That logic is a priori consists in the fact that we cannot
think illogically.
5.4732 We cannot give a sign the wrong sense.
5.47321 Occam’s razor is, of course, not an arbitrary rule nor one justi(cid:28)ed
by its practical success. It simply says that unnecessary elements
in a symbolism mean nothing.
Signs which serve one purpose are logically equivalent, signs
which serve no purpose are logically meaningless.
5.4733 Frege says: Every legitimately constructed proposition must
have a sense; and I say: Every possible proposition is legit-
65

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
imately constructed, and if it has no sense this can only be
because we have given no meaning to some of its constituent
parts.
(Even if we believe that we have done so.)
Thus (cid:16)Socrates is identical(cid:17) says nothing, because we have
given no meaning to the word (cid:16)identical(cid:17) as adjective. For when
it occurs as the sign of equality it symbolizes in an entirely dif-
ferent way(cid:22)the symbolizing relation is another(cid:22)therefore the
symbol is in the two cases entirely di(cid:27)erent; the two symbols
have the sign in common with one another only by accident.
5.474 The number of necessary fundamental operations depends only
on our notation.
5.475 It is only a question of constructing a system of signs of a de(cid:28)nite
number of dimensions(cid:22)of a de(cid:28)nite mathematical multiplicity.
5.476 It is clear that we are not concerned here with a number of
primitive ideas which must be signi(cid:28)ed but with the expression
of a rule.
5.5 Every truth-function is a result of the successive application of
the operation ((cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21)T)(ξ,....) to elementary propositions.
This operation denies all the propositions in the right-hand
bracket and I call it the negation of these propositions.
5.501 An expression in brackets whose terms are propositions I indi-
cate(cid:22)if the order of the terms in the bracket is indi(cid:27)erent(cid:22)by
a sign of the form (cid:16)(ξ)(cid:17). (cid:16)ξ(cid:17) is a variable whose values are the
terms of the expression in brackets, and the line over the variable
indicates that it stands for all its values in the bracket.
(Thus if ξ has the 3 values P, Q, R, then (ξ) = (P, Q, R).)
The values of the variables must be determined.
The determination is the description of the propositions
which the variable stands for.
How the description of the terms of the expression in brackets
takes place is unessential.
We may distinguish 3 kinds of description: 1. Direct enu-
meration. In this case we can place simply its constant values
instead of the variable. 2. Giving a function fx, whose values for
all values of x are the propositions to be described. 3. Giving
66

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
a formal law, according to which those propositions are con-
structed. In this case the terms of the expression in brackets are
all the terms of a formal series.
5.502 Therefore I write instead of (cid:16)((cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21)T)(ξ,....)(cid:17), (cid:16)N(ξ)(cid:17).
N(ξ) is the negation of all the values of the propositional
variable ξ.
5.503 As it is obviously easy to express how propositions can be con-
structed by means of this operation and how propositions are
not to be constructed by means of it, this must be capable of
exact expression.
5.51 If ξ has only one value, then N(ξ) = ∼p (not p), if it has two
values then N(ξ) = ∼p . ∼q (neither p nor q).
5.511 How can the all-embracing logic which mirrors the world use
such special catches and manipulations? Only because all these
are connected into an in(cid:28)nitely (cid:28)ne network, to the great mirror.
5.512 (cid:16) ∼p(cid:17) is true if (cid:16)p(cid:17) is false. Therefore in the true proposition
(cid:16) ∼p(cid:17) (cid:16)p(cid:17) is a false proposition. How then can the stroke (cid:16) ∼ (cid:17)
bring it into agreement with reality?
That which denies in (cid:16)
∼p(cid:17)
is however not (cid:16)
∼
(cid:17), but that which
all signs of this notation, which deny p, have in common.
Hence the common rule according to which (cid:16)
∼p(cid:17),
(cid:16)
∼∼∼p(cid:17),
(cid:16)
∼p∨∼p(cid:17),
(cid:16)
∼p.∼p(cid:17),
etc. etc. (to in(cid:28)nity) are constructed. And
this which is common to them all mirrors denial.
5.513 We could say: What is common to all symbols, which assert
both p and q, is the proposition (cid:16)p . q(cid:17). What is common to all
symbols, which assert either p or q, is the proposition (cid:16)p ∨ q(cid:17).
And similarly we can say: Two propositions are opposed
to one another when they have nothing in common with one
another; and every proposition has only one negative, because
there is only one proposition which lies altogether outside it.
Thus even in Russell’s notation it is evident that (cid:16)q : p∨∼p(cid:17)
says the same as (cid:16)q(cid:17); that (cid:16)p ∨ ∼p(cid:17) says nothing.
5.514 If a notation is (cid:28)xed, there is in it a rule according to which
all the propositions denying p are constructed, a rule according
to which all the propositions asserting p are constructed, a rule
67

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
according to which all the propositions asserting p or q are con-
structed, and so on. These rules are equivalent to the symbols
and in them their sense is mirrored.
5.515 It must be recognized in our symbols that what is connected by
(cid:16)∨(cid:17), (cid:16).(cid:17), etc., must be propositions.
And this is the case, for the symbols (cid:16)p(cid:17) and (cid:16)q(cid:17) presuppose
(cid:16)∨(cid:17), (cid:16) ∼ (cid:17), etc. If the sign (cid:16)p(cid:17) in (cid:16)p ∨ q(cid:17) does not stand for a
complex sign, then by itself it cannot have sense; but then also
the signs (cid:16)p ∨ p(cid:17), (cid:16)p . p(cid:17), etc. which have the same sense as (cid:16)p(cid:17)
have no sense. If, however, (cid:16)p∨p(cid:17) has no sense, then also (cid:16)p∨q(cid:17)
can have no sense.
5.5151 Must the sign of the negative proposition be constructed by
means of the sign of the positive? Why should one not be able
to express the negative proposition by means of a negative fact?
(Like: if (cid:16)a(cid:17) does not stand in a certain relation to (cid:16)b(cid:17), it could
express that aRb is not the case.)
But here also the negative proposition is indirectly con-
structed with the positive.
The positive proposition must presuppose the existence of
the negative proposition and conversely.
5.52 If the values of ξ are the total values of a function fx for all
values of x, then N(ξ) = ∼(∃x) . fx.
5.521 I separate the concept all from the truth-function.
Frege and Russell have introduced generality in connexion
with the logical product or the logical sum. Then it would be
di(cid:30)cult to understand the propositions (cid:16)(∃x).fx(cid:17) and (cid:16)(x).fx(cid:17)
in which both ideas lie concealed.
5.522 That which is peculiar to the (cid:16)symbolism of generality(cid:17) is (cid:28)rstly,
that it refers to a logical prototype, and secondly, that it makes
constants prominent.
5.523 The generality symbol occurs as an argument.
5.524 If the objects are given, therewith are all objects also given.
If the elementary propositions are given, then therewith all
elementary propositions are also given.
5.525 It is not correct to render the proposition (cid:16)(∃x).fx(cid:17)(cid:22)as Russell
does(cid:22)in words (cid:16)fx is possible(cid:17).
68

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
Certainty, possibility or impossibility of a state of a(cid:27)airs are
not expressed by a proposition but by the fact that an expression
is a tautology, a signi(cid:28)cant proposition or a contradiction.
That precedent to which one would always appeal, must be
present in the symbol itself.
5.526 One can describe the world completely by completely general-
ized propositions, i.e. without from the outset co-ordinating any
name with a de(cid:28)nite object.
In order then to arrive at the customary way of expression
we need simply say after an expression (cid:16)there is one and only
one x, which ....(cid:17): and this x is a.
5.5261 A completely generalized proposition is like every other proposi-
tion composite. (This is shown by the fact that in (cid:16)(∃x,ϕ) . ϕx(cid:17)
we must mention (cid:16)ϕ(cid:17) and (cid:16)x(cid:17) separately. Both stand indepen-
dently in signifying relations to the world as in the ungeneralized
proposition.)
A characteristic of a composite symbol: it has something in
common with other symbols.
5.5262 The truth or falsehood of every proposition alters something
in the general structure of the world. And the range which is
allowed to its structure by the totality of elementary proposi-
tions is exactly that which the completely general propositions
delimit.
(If an elementary proposition is true, then, at any rate, there
is one more elementary proposition true.)
5.53 Identity of the object I express by identity of the sign and not by
means of a sign of identity. Di(cid:27)erence of the objects by di(cid:27)erence
of the signs.
5.5301 That identity is not a relation between objects is obvious. This
becomes very clear if, for example, one considers the proposition
(cid:16)(x) : fx. ⊃ .x = a(cid:17). What this proposition says is simply that
only a satis(cid:28)es the function f, and not that only such things
satisfy the function f which have a certain relation to a.
One could of course say that in fact only a has this relation
to a, but in order to express this we should need the sign of
identity itself.
69

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
5.5302 Russell’s de(cid:28)nition of (cid:16)=(cid:17) won’t do; because according to it one
cannot say that two objects have all their properties in com-
mon. (Even if this proposition is never true, it is nevertheless
signi(cid:28)cant.)
5.5303 Roughly speaking: to say of two things that they are identical is
nonsense, and to say of one thing that it is identical with itself
is to say nothing.
5.531 I write therefore not (cid:16)f(a,b) . a = b(cid:17), but (cid:16)f(a,a)(cid:17) (or (cid:16)f(b,b)(cid:17)).
And not (cid:16)f(a,b) . ∼a = b(cid:17), but (cid:16)f(a,b)(cid:17).
5.532 And analogously: not (cid:16)(∃x,y).f(x,y).x = y(cid:17), but (cid:16)(∃x).f(x,x)(cid:17);
and not (cid:16)(∃x,y) . f(x,y) . ∼x = y(cid:17), but (cid:16)(∃x,y) . f(x,y)(cid:17).
(Therefore instead of Russell’s (cid:16)(∃x,y) . f(x,y)(cid:17): (cid:16)(∃x,y) .
f(x,y) . ∨ . (∃x) . f(x,x)(cid:17).)
5.5321 Instead of (cid:16)(x) : fx ⊃ x = a(cid:17) we therefore write e.g. (cid:16)(∃x).fx. ⊃
.fa : ∼(∃x,y) . fx . fy(cid:17).
And the proposition (cid:16)only one x satis(cid:28)es f()(cid:17) reads: (cid:16)(∃x) .
fx : ∼(∃x,y) . fx . fy(cid:17).
5.533 The identity sign is therefore not an essential constituent of log-
ical notation.
5.534 And we see that apparent propositions like: (cid:16)a = a(cid:17), (cid:16)a = b.b =
c. ⊃ a = c(cid:17), (cid:16)(x) . x = x(cid:17), (cid:16)(∃x) . x = a(cid:17), etc. cannot be written
in a correct logical notation at all.
5.535 So all problems disappear which are connected with such pseu-
do-propositions.
This is the place to solve all the problems which arise through
Russell’s (cid:16)Axiom of In(cid:28)nity(cid:17).
What the axiom of in(cid:28)nity is meant to say would be ex-
pressed in language by the fact that there is an in(cid:28)nite number
of names with di(cid:27)erent meanings.
5.5351 There are certain cases in which one is tempted to use expres-
sions of the form (cid:16)a = a(cid:17) or (cid:16)p ⊃ p(cid:17) and of that kind. And
indeed this takes place when one would like to speak of the
archetype Proposition, Thing, etc. So Russell in the Principles
of Mathematics has rendered the nonsense (cid:16)p is a proposition(cid:17) in
symbols by (cid:16)p ⊃ p(cid:17) and has put it as hypothesis before certain
70

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
propositions to show that their places for arguments could only
be occupied by propositions.
(It is nonsense to place the hypothesis p ⊃ p before a propo-
sition in order to ensure that its arguments have the right form,
because the hypothesis for a non-proposition as argument be-
comes not false but meaningless, and because the proposition
itself becomes senseless for arguments of the wrong kind, and
therefore it survives the wrong arguments no better and no worse
than the senseless hypothesis attached for this purpose.)
5.5352 Similarly it was proposed to express (cid:16)There are no things(cid:17) by
(cid:16) ∼(∃x) . x = x(cid:17). But even if this were a proposition(cid:22)would it
not be true if indeed (cid:16)There were things(cid:17), but these were not
identical with themselves?
5.54 In the general propositional form, propositions occur in a prop-
osition only as bases of the truth-operations.
5.541 At (cid:28)rst sight it appears as if there were also a di(cid:27)erent way in
which one proposition could occur in another.
Especially in certain propositional forms of psychology, like
(cid:16)A thinks, that p is the case(cid:17), or (cid:16)A thinks p(cid:17), etc.
Here it appears super(cid:28)cially as if the proposition p stood to
the object A in a kind of relation.
(And in modern epistemology (Russell, Moore, etc.) those
propositions have been conceived in this way.)
5.542 But it is clear that (cid:16)A believes that p(cid:17), (cid:16)A thinks p(cid:17), (cid:16)A says p(cid:17),
are of the form (cid:16)‘p’ says p(cid:17): and here we have no co-ordination
of a fact and an object, but a co-ordination of facts by means of
a co-ordination of their objects.
5.5421 This shows that there is no such thing as the soul(cid:22)the subject,
etc.(cid:22)as it is conceived in contemporary super(cid:28)cial psychology.
A composite soul would not be a soul any longer.
5.5422 The correct explanation of the form of the proposition (cid:16)A judges
p(cid:17) must show that it is impossible to judge a nonsense. (Russell’s
theory does not satisfy this condition.)
5.5423 To perceive a complex means to perceive that its constituents
are combined in such and such a way.
71

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
This perhaps explains that the (cid:28)gure
can be seen in two ways as a cube; and all similar phenomena.
For we really see two di(cid:27)erent facts.
(If I (cid:28)x my eyes (cid:28)rst on the corners a and only glance at b,
a appears in front and b behind, and vice versa.)
5.55 We must now answer a priori the question as to all possible forms
of the elementary propositions.
The elementary proposition consists of names. Since we can-
not give the number of names with di(cid:27)erent meanings, we cannot
give the composition of the elementary proposition.
5.551 Our fundamental principle is that every question which can be
decided at all by logic can be decided without further trouble.
(And if we get into a situation where we need to answer such
a problem by looking at the world, this shows that we are on a
fundamentally wrong track.)
5.552 The (cid:16)experience(cid:17) which we need to understand logic is not that
such and such is the case, but that something is; but that is no
experience.
Logic precedes every experience(cid:22)that something is so.
It is before the How, not before the What.
5.5521 And if this were not the case, how could we apply logic? We
could say: if there were a logic, even if there were no world, how
then could there be a logic, since there is a world?
5.553 Russell said that there were simple relations between di(cid:27)erent
numbers of things (individuals). But between what numbers?
And how should this be decided(cid:22)by experience?
(There is no pre-eminent number.)
72

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
5.554 The enumeration of any special forms would be entirely arbi-
trary.
5.5541 It should be possible to decide a priori whether, for example, I
can get into a situation in which I need to symbolize with a sign
of a 27-termed relation.
5.5542 May we then ask this at all? Can we set out a sign form and
not know whether anything can correspond to it?
Has the question sense: what must be in order that some-
thing can be the case?
5.555 It is clear that we have a concept of the elementary proposition
apart from its special logical form.
Where, however, we can build symbols according to a system,
there this system is the logically important thing and not the
single symbols.
And how would it be possible that I should have to deal with
forms in logic which I can invent: but I must have to deal with
that which makes it possible for me to invent them.
5.556 There cannot be a hierarchy of the forms of the elementary prop-
ositions. Only that which we ourselves construct can we foresee.
5.5561 Empirical reality is limited by the totality of objects. The
boundary appears again in the totality of elementary propo-
sitions.
The hierarchies are and must be independent of reality.
5.5562 If we know on purely logical grounds, that there must be ele-
mentary propositions, then this must be known by everyone who
understands the propositions in their unanalysed form.
5.5563 All propositions of our colloquial language are actually, just as
they are, logically completely in order. That most simple thing
which we ought to give here is not a simile of truth but the
complete truth itself.
(Our problems are not abstract but perhaps the most con-
crete that there are.)
5.557 The application of logic decides what elementary propositions
there are.
What lies in the application logic cannot anticipate.
73

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
It is clear that logic may not collide with its application.
But logic must have contact with its application.
Therefore logic and its application may not overlap one an-
other.
5.5571 If I cannot give elementary propositions a priori then it must
lead to obvious nonsense to try to give them.
5.6 The limits of my language mean the limits of my world.
5.61 Logic (cid:28)lls the world: the limits of the world are also its limits.
We cannot therefore say in logic: This and this there is in
the world, that there is not.
For that would apparently presuppose that we exclude cer-
tain possibilities, and this cannot be the case since otherwise
logic must get outside the limits of the world: that is, if it could
consider these limits from the other side also.
What we cannot think, that we cannot think: we cannot
therefore say what we cannot think.
5.62 This remark provides a key to the question, to what extent solip-
sism is a truth.
In fact what solipsism means, is quite correct, only it cannot
be said, but it shows itself.
That the world is my world, shows itself in the fact that the
limits of the language (the language which only I understand)
mean the limits of my world.
5.621 The world and life are one.
5.63 I am my world. (The microcosm.)
5.631 The thinking, presenting subject; there is no such thing.
If I wrote a book (cid:16)The world as I found it(cid:17), I should also have
therein to report on my body and say which members obey my
will and which do not, etc. This then would be a method of
isolating the subject or rather of showing that in an important
sense there is no subject: that is to say, of it alone in this book
mention could not be made.
5.632 The subject does not belong to the world but it is a limit of the
world.
74

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
5.633 Where in the world is a metaphysical subject to be noted?
You say that this case is altogether like that of the eye and
the (cid:28)eld of sight. But you do not really see the eye.
And from nothing in the (cid:28)eld of sight can it be concluded
that it is seen from an eye.
5.6331 For the (cid:28)eld of sight has not a form like this:
5.634 This is connected with the fact that no part of our experience is
also a priori.
Everything we see could also be otherwise.
Everything we can describe at all could also be otherwise.
There is no order of things a priori.
5.64 Here we see that solipsism strictly carried out coincides with
pure realism. The I in solipsism shrinks to an extensionless
point and there remains the reality co-ordinated with it.
5.641 There is therefore really a sense in which in philosophy we can
talk of a non-psychological I.
The I occurs in philosophy through the fact that the (cid:16)world
is my world(cid:17).
The philosophical I is not the man, not the human body or
the human soul of which psychology treats, but the metaphysical
subject, the limit(cid:22)not a part of the world.
6 The general form of truth-function is: [p,ξ,N(ξ)].
This is the general form of proposition.
6.001 This says nothing else than that every proposition is the result of
successive applications of the operation N′(ξ) to the elementary
propositions.
6.002 If we are given the general form of the way in which a proposition
is constructed, then thereby we are also given the general form of
the way in which by an operation out of one proposition another
can be created.
75

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
6.01 The general form of the operation Ω′(η) is therefore: [ξ,N(ξ)]′(η)
(= [η, ξ, N(ξ)]).
This is the most general form of transition from one propo-
sition to another.
6.02 And thus we come to numbers: I de(cid:28)ne
x = Ω0′x Def. and
Ω′Ων′x = Ων+1′x Def.
According, then, to these symbolic rules we write the series
x, Ω′x, Ω′Ω′x, Ω′Ω′Ω′x.....
as: Ω0′x,Ω0+1′x,Ω0+1+1′x,Ω0+1+1+1′x.....
Therefore I write in place of (cid:16)[x,ξ,Ω′ξ](cid:17),
“[Ω0′x,Ων′x,Ων+1′x](cid:17).
And I de(cid:28)ne:
0 + 1 = 1 Def.
0 + 1 + 1 = 2 Def.
0 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 3 Def.
and so on.
6.021 A number is the exponent of an operation.
6.022 The concept number is nothing else than that which is common
to all numbers, the general form of number.
The concept number is the variable number.
And the concept of equality of numbers is the general form
of all special equalities of numbers.
6.03 The general form of the cardinal number is: [0,ξ,ξ + 1].
6.031 The theory of classes is altogether super(cid:29)uous in mathematics.
This is connected with the fact that the generality which we
need in mathematics is not the accidental one.
6.1 The propositions of logic are tautologies.
76

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
6.11 The propositions of logic therefore say nothing. (They are the
analytical propositions.)
6.111 Theories which make a proposition of logic appear substantial
are always false. One could e.g. believe that the words (cid:16)true(cid:17)
and (cid:16)false(cid:17) signify two properties among other properties, and
then it would appear as a remarkable fact that every proposi-
tion possesses one of these properties. This now by no means
appears self-evident, no more so than the proposition (cid:16)All roses
are either yellow or red(cid:17) would sound even if it were true. Indeed
our proposition now gets quite the character of a proposition of
natural science and this is a certain symptom of its being falsely
understood.
6.112 The correct explanation of logical propositions must give them
a peculiar position among all propositions.
6.113 It is the characteristic mark of logical propositions that one can
perceive in the symbol alone that they are true; and this fact
contains in itself the whole philosophy of logic. And so also it is
one of the most important facts that the truth or falsehood of
non-logical propositions can not be recognized from the propo-
sitions alone.
6.12 The fact that the propositions of logic are tautologies shows the
formal(cid:22)logical(cid:22)properties of language, of the world.
That its constituent parts connected together in this way
give a tautology characterizes the logic of its constituent parts.
In order that propositions connected together in a de(cid:28)nite
way may give a tautology they must have de(cid:28)nite properties of
structure. That they give a tautology when so connected shows
therefore that they possess these properties of structure.
6.1201 That e.g. the propositions (cid:16)p(cid:17) and (cid:16) ∼p(cid:17) in the connexion (cid:16) ∼(p .
∼p)(cid:17)
give a tautology shows that they contradict one another.
That the propositions (cid:16)p ⊃ q(cid:17), (cid:16)p(cid:17) and (cid:16)q(cid:17) connected together
in the form (cid:16)(p ⊃ q) . (p) :⊃: (q)(cid:17) give a tautology shows that q
follows from p and p ⊃ q. That (cid:16)(x) . fx :⊃: fa(cid:17) is a tautology
shows that fa follows from (x) . fx, etc. etc.
6.1202 It is clear that we could have used for this purpose contradictions
instead of tautologies.
77

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
6.1203 In order to recognize a tautology as such, we can, in cases in
which no sign of generality occurs in the tautology, make use
of the following intuitive method: I write instead of (cid:16)p(cid:17), (cid:16)q(cid:17),
(cid:16)r(cid:17), etc., (cid:16)TpF(cid:17), (cid:16)TqF(cid:17), (cid:16)TrF(cid:17), etc. The truth-combinations I
express by brackets, e.g.:
and the co-ordination of the truth or falsity of the whole prop-
osition with the truth-combinations of the truth-arguments by
lines in the following way:
This sign, for example, would therefore present the proposi-
tion p ⊃ q. Now I will proceed to inquire whether such a prop-
osition as ∼(p . ∼p) (The Law of Contradiction) is a tautology.
The form (cid:16)
∼ξ(cid:17)
is written in our notation
the form (cid:16)ξ . η(cid:17) thus:(cid:22)
78

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
Hence the proposition ∼(p . ∼q) runs thus:(cid:22)
If here we put (cid:16)p(cid:17) instead of (cid:16)q(cid:17) and examine the combination
of the outermost T and F with the innermost, it is seen that
the truth of the whole proposition is co-ordinated with all the
truth-combinations of its argument, its falsity with none of the
truth-combinations.
6.121 The propositions of logic demonstrate the logical properties of
propositions, by combining them into propositions which say
nothing.
This method could be called a zero-method. In a logical
proposition propositions are brought into equilibrium with one
another, and the state of equilibrium then shows how these prop-
ositions must be logically constructed.
6.122 Whence it follows that we can get on without logical proposi-
tions, for we can recognize in an adequate notation the formal
properties of the propositions by mere inspection.
6.1221 If for example two propositions (cid:16)p(cid:17) and (cid:16)q(cid:17) give a tautology in
the connexion (cid:16)p ⊃ q(cid:17), then it is clear that q follows from p.
E.g. that (cid:16)q(cid:17) follows from (cid:16)p ⊃ q . p(cid:17) we see from these two
propositions themselves, but we can also show it by combining
them to (cid:16)p ⊃ q.p :⊃: q(cid:17) and then showing that this is a tautology.
6.1222 This throws light on the question why logical propositions can
no more be empirically established than they can be empirically
refuted. Not only must a proposition of logic be incapable of
being contradicted by any possible experience, but it must also
be incapable of being established by any such.
6.1223 It now becomes clear why we often feel as though (cid:16)logical truths(cid:17)
79

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
must be (cid:16)postulated(cid:17) by us. We can in fact postulate them in so
far as we can postulate an adequate notation.
6.1224 It also becomes clear why logic has been called the theory of
forms and of inference.
6.123 It is clear that the laws of logic cannot themselves obey further
logical laws.
(There is not, as Russell supposed, for every (cid:16)type(cid:17) a special
law of contradiction; but one is su(cid:30)cient, since it is not applied
to itself.)
6.1231 The mark of logical propositions is not their general validity.
To be general is only to be accidentally valid for all things.
An ungeneralized proposition can be tautologous just as well as
a generalized one.
6.1232 Logical general validity, we could call essential as opposed to
accidental general validity, e.g. of the proposition (cid:16)all men are
mortal(cid:17). Propositions like Russell’s (cid:16)axiom of reducibility(cid:17) are
not logical propositions, and this explains our feeling that, if
true, they can only be true by a happy chance.
6.1233 We can imagine a world in which the axiom of reducibility is
not valid. But it is clear that logic has nothing to do with the
question whether our world is really of this kind or not.
6.124 The logical propositions describe the sca(cid:27)olding of the world,
or rather they present it. They (cid:16)treat(cid:17) of nothing. They pre-
suppose that names have meaning, and that elementary propo-
sitions have sense. And this is their connexion with the world.
It is clear that it must show something about the world that
certain combinations of symbols(cid:22)which essentially have a def-
inite character(cid:22)are tautologies. Herein lies the decisive point.
We said that in the symbols which we use much is arbitrary,
much not. In logic only this expresses: but this means that in
logic it is not we who express, by means of signs, what we want,
but in logic the nature of the essentially necessary signs itself
asserts. That is to say, if we know the logical syntax of any sign
language, then all the propositions of logic are already given.
6.125 It is possible, even in the old logic, to give at the outset a de-
scription of all (cid:16)true(cid:17) logical propositions.
80

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
6.1251 Hence there can never be surprises in logic.
6.126 Whether a proposition belongs to logic can be determined by
determining the logical properties of the symbol.
And this we do when we prove a logical proposition. For
without troubling ourselves about a sense and a meaning, we
form the logical propositions out of others by mere symbolic
rules.
We prove a logical proposition by creating it out of other
logical propositions by applying in succession certain operations,
which again generate tautologies out of the (cid:28)rst. (And from a
tautology only tautologies follow.)
Naturally this way of showing that its propositions are tau-
tologies is quite unessential to logic. Because the propositions,
from which the proof starts, must show without proof that they
are tautologies.
6.1261 In logic process and result are equivalent. (Therefore no sur-
prises.)
6.1262 Proof in logic is only a mechanical expedient to facilitate the
recognition of tautology, where it is complicated.
6.1263 It would be too remarkable, if one could prove a signi(cid:28)cant prop-
osition logically from another, and a logical proposition also. It
is clear from the beginning that the logical proof of a signi(cid:28)cant
proposition and the proof in logic must be two quite di(cid:27)erent
things.
6.1264 The signi(cid:28)cant proposition asserts something, and its proof
shows that it is so; in logic every proposition is the form of a
proof.
Every proposition of logic is a modus ponens presented in
signs. (And the modus ponens can not be expressed by a prop-
osition.)
6.1265 Logic can always be conceived to be such that every proposition
is its own proof.
6.127 All propositions of logic are of equal rank; there are not some
which are essentially primitive and others deduced from these.
Every tautology itself shows that it is a tautology.
81

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
6.1271 It is clear that the number of (cid:16)primitive propositions of logic(cid:17)
is arbitrary, for we could deduce logic from one primitive prop-
osition by simply forming, for example, the logical product of
Frege’s primitive propositions. (Frege would perhaps say that
this would no longer be immediately self-evident. But it is re-
markable that so exact a thinker as Frege should have appealed
to the degree of self-evidence as the criterion of a logical propo-
sition.)
6.13 Logic is not a theory but a re(cid:29)exion of the world.
Logic is transcendental.
6.2 Mathematics is a logical method.
The propositions of mathematics are equations, and there-
fore pseudo-propositions.
6.21 Mathematical propositions express no thoughts.
6.211 In life it is never a mathematical proposition which we need,
but we use mathematical propositions only in order to infer
from propositions which do not belong to mathematics to others
which equally do not belong to mathematics.
(In philosophy the question (cid:16)Why do we really use that word,
that proposition?(cid:17) constantly leads to valuable results.)
6.22 The logic of the world which the propositions of logic show in
tautologies, mathematics shows in equations.
6.23 If two expressions are connected by the sign of equality, this
means that they can be substituted for one another. But
whether this is the case must show itself in the two expressions
themselves.
It characterizes the logical form of two expressions, that they
can be substituted for one another.
6.231 It is a property of a(cid:30)rmation that it can be conceived as double
denial.
It is a property of (cid:16)1 + 1 + 1 + 1(cid:17) that it can be conceived as
(cid:16)(1 + 1) + (1 + 1)(cid:17).
6.232 Frege says that these expressions have the same meaning but
di(cid:27)erent senses.
But what is essential about equation is that it is not neces-
82

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
sary in order to show that both expressions, which are connected
by the sign of equality, have the same meaning: for this can be
perceived from the two expressions themselves.
6.2321 And, that the propositions of mathematics can be proved means
nothing else than that their correctness can be seen without our
having to compare what they express with the facts as regards
correctness.
6.2322 The identity of the meaning of two expressions cannot be as-
serted. For in order to be able to assert anything about their
meaning, I must know their meaning, and if I know their mean-
ing, I know whether they mean the same or something di(cid:27)erent.
6.2323 The equation characterizes only the standpoint from which I
consider the two expressions, that is to say the standpoint of
their equality of meaning.
6.233 To the question whether we need intuition for the solution of
mathematical problems it must be answered that language itself
here supplies the necessary intuition.
6.2331 The process of calculation brings about just this intuition.
Calculation is not an experiment.
6.234 Mathematics is a method of logic.
6.2341 The essential of mathematical method is working with equa-
tions. On this method depends the fact that every proposition
of mathematics must be self-intelligible.
6.24 The method by which mathematics arrives at its equations is
the method of substitution.
For equations express the substitutability of two expressions,
and we proceed from a number of equations to new equations,
replacing expressions by others in accordance with the equations.
6.241 Thus the proof of the proposition 2 × 2 = 4 runs:
(Ων)µ′x = Ων×µ′x Def.
Ω2×2′x = (Ω2)2′x = (Ω2)1+1′x = Ω2′Ω2′x = Ω1+1′Ω1+1′x
= (Ω′Ω)′(Ω′Ω)′x = Ω′Ω′Ω′Ω′x = Ω1+1+1+1′x = Ω4′x.
6.3 Logical research means the investigation of all regularity. And
outside logic all is accident.
83

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
6.31 The so-called law of induction cannot in any case be a logical
law, for it is obviously a signi(cid:28)cant proposition.(cid:22)And therefore
it cannot be a law a priori either.
*
6.32 The law of causality is not a law but the form of a law.
6.321 (cid:16)Law of Causality(cid:17) is a class name. And as in mechanics there
are, for instance, minimum-laws, such as that of least action, so
in physics there are causal laws, laws of the causality form.
6.3211 Men had indeed an idea that there must be a (cid:16)law of least ac-
tion(cid:17), before they knew exactly how it ran. (Here, as always,
the a priori certain proves to be something purely logical.)
6.33 We do not believe a priori in a law of conservation, but we know
a priori the possibility of a logical form.
6.34 All propositions, such as the law of causation, the law of continu-
ity in nature, the law of least expenditure in nature, etc. etc., all
these are a priori intuitions of possible forms of the propositions
of science.
6.341 Newtonian mechanics, for example, brings the description of the
universe to a uni(cid:28)ed form. Let us imagine a white surface with
irregular black spots. We now say: Whatever kind of picture
these make I can always get as near as I like to its description,
if I cover the surface with a su(cid:30)ciently (cid:28)ne square network and
now say of every square that it is white or black. In this way
I shall have brought the description of the surface to a uni(cid:28)ed
form. This form is arbitrary, because I could have applied with
equal success a net with a triangular or hexagonal mesh. It can
happen that the description would have been simpler with the
aid of a triangular mesh; that is to say we might have described
the surface more accurately with a triangular, and coarser, than
with the (cid:28)ner square mesh, or vice versa, and so on. To the
di(cid:27)erent networks correspond di(cid:27)erent systems of describing the
world. Mechanics determine a form of description by saying: All
propositions in the description of the world must be obtained in a
given way from a number of given propositions(cid:22)the mechanical
axioms. It thus provides the bricks for building the edi(cid:28)ce of
science, and says: Whatever building thou wouldst erect, thou
*I.e.
not the form of one particular law, but of any law of a certain sort (B. R.).
84

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
shalt construct it in some manner with these bricks and these
alone.
(As with the system of numbers one must be able to write
down any arbitrary number, so with the system of mechanics one
must be able to write down any arbitrary physical proposition.)
6.342 And now we see the relative position of logic and mechanics.
(We could construct the network out of (cid:28)gures of di(cid:27)erent kinds,
as out of triangles and hexagons together.) That a picture like
that instanced above can be described by a network of a given
form asserts nothing about the picture. (For this holds of every
picture of this kind.) But this does characterize the picture, the
fact, namely, that it can be completely described by a de(cid:28)nite
net of de(cid:28)nite (cid:28)neness.
So too the fact that it can be described by Newtonian me-
chanics asserts nothing about the world; but this asserts some-
thing, namely, that it can be described in that particular way in
which it is described, as is indeed the case. The fact, too, that it
can be described more simply by one system of mechanics than
by another says something about the world.
6.343 Mechanics is an attempt to construct according to a single plan
all true propositions which we need for the description of the
world.
6.3431 Through the whole apparatus of logic the physical laws still
speak of the objects of the world.
6.3432 We must not forget that the description of the world by me-
chanics is always quite general. There is, for example, never any
mention of particular material points in it, but always only of
some points or other.
6.35 Although the spots in our picture are geometrical (cid:28)gures, ge-
ometry can obviously say nothing about their actual form and
position. But the network is purely geometrical, and all its prop-
erties can be given a priori.
Laws, like the law of causation, etc., treat of the network and
not of what the network described.
6.36 If there were a law of causality, it might run: (cid:16)There are natural
laws(cid:17).
85

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
But that can clearly not be said: it shows itself.
6.361 In the terminology of Hertz we might say: Only uniform con-
nexions are thinkable.
6.3611 We cannot compare any process with the (cid:16)passage of time(cid:17)(cid:22)
there is no such thing(cid:22)but only with another process (say, with
the movement of the chronometer).
Hence the description of the temporal sequence of events is
only possible if we support ourselves on another process.
It is exactly analogous for space. When, for example, we say
that neither of two events (which mutually exclude one another)
can occur, because there is no cause why the one should occur
rather than the other, it is really a matter of our being unable
to describe one of the two events unless there is some sort of
asymmetry. And if there is such an asymmetry, we can regard
this as the cause of the occurrence of the one and of the non-
occurrence of the other.
6.36111 The Kantian problem of the right and left hand which cannot
be made to cover one another already exists in the plane, and
even in one-dimensional space; where the two congruent (cid:28)gures
a and b cannot be made to cover one another without moving
them out of this space. The right and left hand are in fact
completely congruent. And the fact that they cannot be made
to cover one another has nothing to do with it.
A right-hand glove could be put on a left hand if it could be
turned round in four-dimensional space.
6.362 What can be described can happen too, and what is excluded
by the law of causality cannot be described.
6.363 The process of induction is the process of assuming the simplest
law that can be made to harmonize with our experience.
6.3631 This process, however, has no logical foundation but only a psy-
chological one.
It is clear that there are no grounds for believing that the
simplest course of events will really happen.
86

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
6.36311 That the sun will rise to-morrow, is an hypothesis; and that
means that we do not know whether it will rise.
6.37 A necessity for one thing to happen because another has hap-
pened does not exist. There is only logical necessity.
6.371 At the basis of the whole modern view of the world lies the
illusion that the so-called laws of nature are the explanations of
natural phenomena.
6.372 So people stop short at natural laws as at something unassail-
able, as did the ancients at God and Fate.
And they both are right and wrong. But the ancients were
clearer, in so far as they recognized one clear conclusion, whereas
in the modern system it should appear as though everything were
explained.
6.373 The world is independent of my will.
6.374 Even if everything we wished were to happen, this would only
be, so to speak, a favour of fate, for there is no logical connexion
between will and world, which would guarantee this, and the
assumed physical connexion itself we could not again will.
6.375 As there is only a logical necessity, so there is only a logical
impossibility.
6.3751 For two colours, e.g. to be at one place in the visual (cid:28)eld, is
impossible, logically impossible, for it is excluded by the logical
structure of colour.
Let us consider how this contradiction presents itself in phys-
ics. Somewhat as follows: That a particle cannot at the same
time have two velocities, i.e. that at the same time it cannot be
in two places, i.e. that particles in di(cid:27)erent places at the same
time cannot be identical.
(It is clear that the logical product of two elementary prop-
ositions can neither be a tautology nor a contradiction. The as-
sertion that a point in the visual (cid:28)eld has two di(cid:27)erent colours
at the same time, is a contradiction.)
6.4 All propositions are of equal value.
6.41 The sense of the world must lie outside the world. In the world
everything is as it is and happens as it does happen. In it there
is no value(cid:22)and if there were, it would be of no value.
87

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
If there is a value which is of value, it must lie outside all
happening and being-so. For all happening and being-so is ac-
cidental.
What makes it non-accidental cannot lie in the world, for
otherwise this would again be accidental.
It must lie outside the world.
6.42 Hence also there can be no ethical propositions.
Propositions cannot express anything higher.
6.421 It is clear that ethics cannot be expressed.
Ethics are transcendental.
(Ethics and (cid:230)sthetics are one.)
6.422 The (cid:28)rst thought in setting up an ethical law of the form (cid:16)thou
shalt ...(cid:17) is: And what if I do not do it. But it is clear that
ethics has nothing to do with punishment and reward in the
ordinary sense. This question as to the consequences of an action
must therefore be irrelevant. At least these consequences will not
be events. For there must be something right in that formulation
of the question. There must be some sort of ethical reward and
ethical punishment, but this must lie in the action itself.
(And this is clear also that the reward must be something
acceptable, and the punishment something unacceptable.)
6.423 Of the will as the bearer of the ethical we cannot speak.
And the will as a phenomenon is only of interest to psychol-
ogy.
6.43 If good or bad willing changes the world, it can only change the
limits of the world, not the facts; not the things that can be
expressed in language.
In brief, the world must thereby become quite another. It
must so to speak wax or wane as a whole.
The world of the happy is quite another than that of the
unhappy.
6.431 As in death, too, the world does not change, but ceases.
6.4311 Death is not an event of life. Death is not lived through.
If by eternity is understood not endless temporal duration
but timelessness, then he lives eternally who lives in the present.
88

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
Our life is endless in the way that our visual (cid:28)eld is without
limit.
6.4312 The temporal immortality of the soul of man, that is to say, its
eternal survival also after death, is not only in no way guaran-
teed, but this assumption in the (cid:28)rst place will not do for us
what we always tried to make it do. Is a riddle solved by the
fact that I survive for ever? Is this eternal life not as enigmatic
as our present one? The solution of the riddle of life in space
and time lies outside space and time.
(It is not problems of natural science which have to be
solved.)
6.432 How the world is, is completely indi(cid:27)erent for what is higher.
God does not reveal himself in the world.
6.4321 The facts all belong only to the task and not to its performance.
6.44 Not how the world is, is the mystical, but that it is.
6.45 The contemplation of the world sub specie aeterni is its contem-
plation as a limited whole.
The feeling of the world as a limited whole is the mystical
feeling.
6.5 For an answer which cannot be expressed the question too can-
not be expressed.
The riddle does not exist.
If a question can be put at all, then it can also be answered.
6.51 Scepticism is not irrefutable, but palpably senseless, if it would
doubt where a question cannot be asked.
For doubt can only exist where there is a question; a question
only where there is an answer, and this only where something
can be said.
6.52 We feel that even if all possible scienti(cid:28)c questions be answered,
the problems of life have still not been touched at all. Of course
there is then no question left, and just this is the answer.
6.521 The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of
this problem.
(Is not this the reason why men to whom after long doubting
89

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
the sense of life became clear, could not then say wherein this
sense consisted?)
6.522 There is indeed the inexpressible. This shows itself; it is the
mystical.
6.53 The right method of philosophy would be this. To say nothing
except what can be said, i.e. the propositions of natural science,
i.e. something that has nothing to do with philosophy: and then
always, when someone else wished to say something metaphys-
ical, to demonstrate to him that he had given no meaning to
certain signs in his propositions. This method would be un-
satisfying to the other(cid:22)he would not have the feeling that we
were teaching him philosophy(cid:22)but it would be the only strictly
correct method.
6.54 My propositions are elucidatory in this way: he who understands
me (cid:28)nally recognizes them as senseless, when he has climbed out
through them, on them, over them. (He must so to speak throw
away the ladder, after he has climbed up on it.)
He must surmount these propositions; then he sees the world
rightly.
7 Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.
90

Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung
VORWORT
Dieses Buch wird vielleicht nur der verstehen, der die Gedanken, die
darin ausgedr(cid:252)ckt sind(cid:22)oder doch (cid:228)hnliche Gedanken(cid:22)schon selbst ein-
mal gedacht hat.(cid:22)Es ist also kein Lehrbuch.(cid:22)Sein Zweck w(cid:228)re erreicht,
wenn es Einem, der es mit Verst(cid:228)ndnis liest Vergn(cid:252)gen bereitete.
Das Buch behandelt die philosophischen Probleme und zeigt(cid:22)wie ich
glaube(cid:22)dass die Fragestellung dieser Probleme auf dem Missverst(cid:228)nd-
nis der Logik unserer Sprache beruht. Man k(cid:246)nnte den ganzen Sinn des
Buches etwa in die Worte fassen: Was sich (cid:252)berhaupt sagen l(cid:228)sst, l(cid:228)sst
sich klar sagen; und wovon man nicht reden kann, dar(cid:252)ber muss man
schweigen.
Das Buch will also dem Denken eine Grenze ziehen, oder vielmehr(cid:22)
nicht dem Denken, sondern dem Ausdruck der Gedanken: Denn um dem
Denken eine Grenze zu ziehen, m(cid:252)ssten wir beide Seiten dieser Grenze
denken k(cid:246)nnen (wir m(cid:252)ssten also denken k(cid:246)nnen, was sich nicht denken
l(cid:228)sst).
Die Grenze wird also nur in der Sprache gezogen werden k(cid:246)nnen und
was jenseits der Grenze liegt, wird einfach Unsinn sein.
Wieweit meine Bestrebungen mit denen anderer Philosophen zusam-
menfallen, will ich nicht beurteilen. Ja, was ich hier geschrieben habe
macht im Einzelnen (cid:252)berhaupt nicht den Anspruch auf Neuheit; und
darum gebe ich auch keine Quellen an, weil es mir gleichg(cid:252)ltig ist, ob das
was ich gedacht habe, vor mir schon ein anderer gedacht hat.
Nur das will ich erw(cid:228)hnen, dass ich den grossartigen Werken Freges
und den Arbeiten meines Freundes Herrn Bertrand Russell einen grossen
Teil der Anregung zu meinen Gedanken schulde.
Wenn diese Arbeit einen Wert hat, so besteht er in Zweierlei. Erstens
darin, dass in ihr Gedanken ausgedr(cid:252)ckt sind, und dieser Wert wird umso
gr(cid:246)sser sein, je besser die Gedanken ausgedr(cid:252)ckt sind. Je mehr der Nagel
auf den Kopf getro(cid:27)en ist.(cid:22)Hier bin ich mir bewusst, weit hinter dem
M(cid:246)glichen zur(cid:252)ckgeblieben zu sein. Einfach darum, weil meine Kraft zur
91

Bew(cid:228)ltigung der Aufgabe zu gering ist.(cid:22)M(cid:246)gen andere kommen und es
besser machen.
Dagegen scheint mir die Wahrheit der hier mitgeteilten Gedanken
unantastbar und de(cid:28)nitiv. Ich bin also der Meinung, die Probleme im
Wesentlichen endg(cid:252)ltig gel(cid:246)st zu haben. Und wenn ich mich hierin nicht
irre, so besteht nun der Wert dieser Arbeit zweitens darin, dass sie zeigt,
wie wenig damit getan ist, dass diese Probleme gel(cid:246)st sind.
L. W.
Wien, 1918.
92

*
1 Die Welt ist alles, was der Fall ist.
1.1 Die Welt ist die Gesamtheit der Tatsachen, nicht der Dinge.
1.11 Die Welt ist durch die Tatsachen bestimmt und dadurch, dass
es alle Tatsachen sind.
1.12 Denn, die Gesamtheit der Tatsachen bestimmt, was der Fall ist
und auch, was alles nicht der Fall ist.
1.13 Die Tatsachen im logischen Raum sind die Welt.
1.2 Die Welt zerf(cid:228)llt in Tatsachen.
1.21 Eines kann der Fall sein oder nicht der Fall sein und alles (cid:252)brige
gleich bleiben.
2 Was der Fall ist, die Tatsache, ist das Bestehen von Sachverhal-
ten.
2.01 Der Sachverhalt ist eine Verbindung von Gegenst(cid:228)nden. (Sachen,
Dingen.)
2.011 Es ist dem Ding wesentlich, der Bestandteil eines Sachverhaltes
sein zu k(cid:246)nnen.
2.012 In der Logik ist nichts zuf(cid:228)llig: Wenn das Ding im Sachverhalt
vorkommen kann, so muss die M(cid:246)glichkeit des Sachverhaltes
im Ding bereits pr(cid:228)judiziert sein.
2.0121 Es erschiene gleichsam als Zufall, wenn dem Ding, das allein f(cid:252)r
sich bestehen k(cid:246)nnte, nachtr(cid:228)glich eine Sachlage passen w(cid:252)rde.
Wenn die Dinge in Sachverhalten vorkommen k(cid:246)nnen, so
muss dies schon in ihnen liegen.
*
Die Decimalzahlen als Nummern der einzelnen S(cid:228)tze deuten das logische Gewicht
der S(cid:228)tze an, den Nachdruck, der auf ihnen in meiner Darstellung liegt. Die S(cid:228)tze
n.1, n.2, n.3, etc., sind Bemerkungen zum Satze No. n; die S(cid:228)tze n.m1, n.m2, etc.
Bemerkungen zum Satze No. n.m; und so weiter.
93

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
(Etwas Logisches kann nicht nur-m(cid:246)glich sein. Die Logik han-
delt von jeder M(cid:246)glichkeit und alle M(cid:246)glichkeiten sind ihre Tat-
sachen.)
Wie wir uns r(cid:228)umliche Gegenst(cid:228)nde (cid:252)berhaupt nicht aus-
serhalb des Raumes, zeitliche nicht ausserhalb der Zeit denken
k(cid:246)nnen, so k(cid:246)nnen wir uns keinen Gegenstand ausserhalb der
M(cid:246)glichkeit seiner Verbindung mit anderen denken.
Wenn ich mir den Gegenstand im Verbande des Sachverhalts
denken kann, so kann ich ihn nicht ausserhalb der M(cid:246)glich-
keit dieses Verbandes denken.
2.0122 Das Ding ist selbst(cid:228)ndig, insofern es in allen m(cid:246)glichen Sach-
lagen vorkommen kann, aber diese Form der Selbst(cid:228)ndigkeit ist
eine Form des Zusammenhangs mit dem Sachverhalt, eine Form
der Unselbst(cid:228)ndigkeit. (Es ist unm(cid:246)glich, dass Worte in zwei
verschiedenen Weisen auftreten, allein und im Satz.)
2.0123 Wenn ich den Gegenstand kenne, so kenne ich auch s(cid:228)mtliche
M(cid:246)glichkeiten seines Vorkommens in Sachverhalten.
(Jede solche M(cid:246)glichkeit muss in der Natur des Gegenstandes
liegen.)
Es kann nicht nachtr(cid:228)glich eine neue M(cid:246)glichkeit gefunden
werden.
2.01231 Um einen Gegenstand zu kennen, muss ich zwar nicht seine
externen(cid:22)aber ich muss alle seine internen Eigenschaften ken-
nen.
2.0124 Sind alle Gegenst(cid:228)nde gegeben, so sind damit auch alle m(cid:246)g-
lichen Sachverhalte gegeben.
2.013 Jedes Ding ist, gleichsam, in einem Raume m(cid:246)glicher Sachver-
halte. Diesen Raum kann ich mir leer denken, nicht aber das
Ding ohne den Raum.
2.0131 Der r(cid:228)umliche Gegenstand muss im unendlichen Raume liegen.
(Der Raumpunkt ist eine Argumentstelle.)
Der Fleck im Gesichtsfeld muss zwar nicht rot sein, aber eine
Farbe muss er haben: er hat sozusagen den Farbenraum um sich.
Der Ton muss eine H(cid:246)he haben, der Gegenstand des Tastsinnes
eine H(cid:228)rte usw.
94

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
2.014 Die Gegenst(cid:228)nde enthalten die M(cid:246)glichkeit aller Sachlagen.
2.0141 Die M(cid:246)glichkeit seines Vorkommens in Sachverhalten, ist die
Form des Gegenstandes.
2.02 Der Gegenstand ist einfach.
2.0201 Jede Aussage (cid:252)ber Komplexe l(cid:228)sst sich in eine Aussage (cid:252)ber
deren Bestandteile und in diejenigen S(cid:228)tze zerlegen, welche die
Komplexe vollst(cid:228)ndig beschreiben.
2.021 Die Gegenst(cid:228)nde bilden die Substanz der Welt. Darum k(cid:246)nnen
sie nicht zusammengesetzt sein.
2.0211 H(cid:228)tte die Welt keine Substanz, so w(cid:252)rde, ob ein Satz Sinn hat,
davon abh(cid:228)ngen, ob ein anderer Satz wahr ist.
2.0212 Es w(cid:228)re dann unm(cid:246)glich, ein Bild der Welt (wahr oder falsch)
zu entwerfen.
2.022 Es ist o(cid:27)enbar, dass auch eine von der wirklichen noch so ver-
schieden gedachte Welt Etwas(cid:22)eine Form(cid:22)mit der wirklichen
gemein haben muss.
2.023 Diese feste Form besteht eben aus den Gegenst(cid:228)nden.
2.0231 Die Substanz der Welt kann nur eine Form und keine materiel-
len Eigenschaften bestimmen. Denn diese werden erst durch die
S(cid:228)tze dargestellt(cid:22)erst durch die Kon(cid:28)guration der Gegenst(cid:228)nde
gebildet.
2.0232 Beil(cid:228)u(cid:28)g gesprochen: Die Gegenst(cid:228)nde sind farblos.
2.0233 Zwei Gegenst(cid:228)nde von der gleichen logischen Form sind(cid:22)abge-
sehen von ihren externen Eigenschaften(cid:22)von einander nur da-
durch unterschieden, dass sie verschieden sind.
2.02331 Entweder ein Ding hat Eigenschaften, die kein anderes hat, dann
kann man es ohneweiteres durch eine Beschreibung aus den an-
deren herausheben, und darauf hinweisen; oder aber, es gibt
mehrere Dinge, die ihre s(cid:228)mtlichen Eigenschaften gemeinsam
haben, dann ist es (cid:252)berhaupt unm(cid:246)glich auf eines von ihnen
zu zeigen.
Denn, ist das Ding durch nichts hervorgehoben, so kann ich
es nicht hervorheben, denn sonst ist es eben hervorgehoben.
95

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
2.024 Die Substanz ist das, was unabh(cid:228)ngig von dem was der Fall ist,
besteht.
2.025 Sie ist Form und Inhalt.
2.0251 Raum, Zeit und Farbe (F(cid:228)rbigkeit) sind Formen der Gegenst(cid:228)n-
de.
2.026 Nur wenn es Gegenst(cid:228)nde gibt, kann es eine feste Form der Welt
geben.
2.027 Das Feste, das Bestehende und der Gegenstand sind Eins.
2.0271 Der Gegenstand ist das Feste, Bestehende; die Kon(cid:28)guration ist
das Wechselnde, Unbest(cid:228)ndige.
2.0272 Die Kon(cid:28)guration der Gegenst(cid:228)nde bildet den Sachverhalt.
2.03 Im Sachverhalt h(cid:228)ngen die Gegenst(cid:228)nde ineinander, wie die Glie-
der einer Kette.
2.031 Im Sachverhalt verhalten sich die Gegenst(cid:228)nde in bestimmter
Art und Weise zueinander.
2.032 Die Art und Weise, wie die Gegenst(cid:228)nde im Sachverhalt zusam-
menh(cid:228)ngen, ist die Struktur des Sachverhaltes.
2.033 Die Form ist die M(cid:246)glichkeit der Struktur.
2.034 Die Struktur der Tatsache besteht aus den Strukturen der Sach-
verhalte.
2.04 Die Gesamtheit der bestehenden Sachverhalte ist die Welt.
2.05 Die Gesamtheit der bestehenden Sachverhalte bestimmt auch,
welche Sachverhalte nicht bestehen.
2.06 Das Bestehen und Nichtbestehen von Sachverhalten ist die Wirk-
lichkeit.
(Das Bestehen von Sachverhalten nennen wir auch eine po-
sitive, das Nichtbestehen eine negative Tatsache.)
2.061 Die Sachverhalte sind von einander unabh(cid:228)ngig.
2.062 Aus dem Bestehen oder Nichtbestehen eines Sachverhaltes kann
nicht auf das Bestehen oder Nichtbestehen eines anderen ge-
schlossen werden.
2.063 Die gesamte Wirklichkeit ist die Welt.
96

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
2.1 Wir machen uns Bilder der Tatsachen.
2.11 Das Bild stellt die Sachlage im logischen Raume, das Bestehen
und Nichtbestehen von Sachverhalten vor.
2.12 Das Bild ist ein Modell der Wirklichkeit.
2.13 Den Gegenst(cid:228)nden entsprechen im Bilde die Elemente des Bil-
des.
2.131 Die Elemente des Bildes vertreten im Bild die Gegenst(cid:228)nde.
2.14 Das Bild besteht darin, dass sich seine Elemente in bestimmter
Art und Weise zu einander verhalten.
2.141 Das Bild ist eine Tatsache.
2.15 Dass sich die Elemente des Bildes in bestimmter Art und Wei-
se zu einander verhalten stellt vor, dass sich die Sachen so zu
einander verhalten.
Dieser Zusammenhang der Elemente des Bildes heisse seine
Struktur und ihre M(cid:246)glichkeit seine Form der Abbildung.
2.151 Die Form der Abbildung ist die M(cid:246)glichkeit, dass sich die Dinge
so zu einander verhalten, wie die Elemente des Bildes.
2.1511 Das Bild ist so mit der Wirklichkeit verkn(cid:252)pft; es reicht bis zu
ihr.
2.1512 Es ist wie ein Massstab an die Wirklichkeit angelegt.
2.15121 Nur die (cid:228)ussersten Punkte der Teilstriche b er(cid:252)hren den zu
messenden Gegenstand.
2.1513 Nach dieser Au(cid:27)assung geh(cid:246)rt also zum Bilde auch noch die
abbildende Beziehung, die es zum Bild macht.
2.1514 Die abbildende Beziehung besteht aus den Zuordnungen der Ele-
mente des Bildes und der Sachen.
2.1515 Diese Zuordnungen sind gleichsam die F(cid:252)hler der Bildelemente,
mit denen das Bild die Wirklichkeit ber(cid:252)hrt.
2.16 Die Tatsache muss um Bild zu sein, etwas mit dem Abgebildeten
gemeinsam haben.
2.161 In Bild und Abgebildetem muss etwas identisch sein, damit das
eine (cid:252)berhaupt ein Bild des anderen sein kann.
97

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
2.17 Was das Bild mit der Wirklichkeit gemein haben muss, um sie
auf seine Art und Weise(cid:22)richtig oder falsch(cid:22)abbilden zu k(cid:246)n-
nen, ist seine Form der Abbildung.
2.171 Das Bild kann jede Wirklichkeit abbilden, deren Form es hat.
Das r(cid:228)umliche Bild alles R(cid:228)umliche, das farbige alles Farbige,
etc.
2.172 Seine Form der Abbildung aber, kann das Bild nicht abbilden;
es weist sie auf.
2.173 Das Bild stellt sein Objekt von ausserhalb dar (sein Standpunkt
ist seine Form der Darstellung), darum stellt das Bild sein Ob-
jekt richtig oder falsch dar.
2.174 Das Bild kann sich aber nicht ausserhalb seiner Form der Dar-
stellung stellen.
2.18 Was jedes Bild, welcher Form immer, mit der Wirklichkeit ge-
mein haben muss, um sie (cid:252)berhaupt(cid:22)richtig oder falsch(cid:22)ab-
bilden zu k(cid:246)nnen, ist die logische Form, das ist, die Form der
Wirklichkeit.
2.181 Ist die Form der Abbildung die logische Form, so heisst das Bild
das logische Bild.
2.182 Jedes Bild ist auch ein logisches. (Dagegen ist z. B. nicht jedes
Bild ein r(cid:228)umliches.)
2.19 Das logische Bild kann die Welt abbilden.
2.2 Das Bild hat mit dem Abgebildeten die logische Form der Ab-
bildung gemein.
2.201 Das Bild bildet die Wirklichkeit ab, indem es eine M(cid:246)glichkeit
des Bestehens und Nichtbestehens von Sachverhalten darstellt.
2.202 Das Bild stellt eine m(cid:246)gliche Sachlage im logischen Raume dar.
2.203 Das Bild enth(cid:228)lt die M(cid:246)glichkeit der Sachlage, die es darstellt.
2.21 Das Bild stimmt mit der Wirklichkeit (cid:252)berein oder nicht; es ist
richtig oder unrichtig, wahr oder falsch.
2.22 Das Bild stellt dar, was es darstellt, unabh(cid:228)ngig von seiner
Wahr- oder Falschheit, durch die Form der Abbildung.
2.221 Was das Bild darstellt, ist sein Sinn.
98

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
2.222 In der (cid:220)bereinstimmung oder Nicht(cid:252)bereinstimmung seines Sin-
nes mit der Wirklichkeit, besteht seine Wahrheit oder Falschheit.
2.223 Um zu erkennen, ob das Bild wahr oder falsch ist, m(cid:252)ssen wir
es mit der Wirklichkeit vergleichen.
2.224 Aus dem Bild allein ist nicht zu erkennen, ob es wahr oder falsch
ist.
2.225 Ein a priori wahres Bild gibt es nicht.
3 Das logische Bild der Tatsachen ist der Gedanke.
3.001 (cid:18)Ein Sachverhalt ist denkbar(cid:16) heisst: Wir k(cid:246)nnen uns ein Bild
von ihm machen.
3.01 Die Gesamtheit der wahren Gedanken sind ein Bild der Welt.
3.02 Der Gedanke enth(cid:228)lt die M(cid:246)glichkeit der Sachlage die er denkt.
Was denkbar ist, ist auch m(cid:246)glich.
3.03 Wir k(cid:246)nnen nichts Unlogisches denken, weil wir sonst unlogisch
denken m(cid:252)ssten.
3.031 Man sagte einmal, dass Gott alles scha(cid:27)en k(cid:246)nne, nur nichts,
was den logischen Gesetzen zuwider w(cid:228)re.(cid:22)Wir k(cid:246)nnten n(cid:228)m-
lich von einer (cid:18)unlogischen(cid:16) Welt nicht sagen, wie sie auss(cid:228)he.
3.032 Etwas (cid:18)der Logik widersprechendes(cid:16) in der Sprache darstellen,
kann man ebensowenig, wie in der Geometrie eine den Geset-
zen des Raumes widersprechende Figur durch ihre Koordinaten
darstellen; oder die Koordinaten eines Punktes angeben, welcher
nicht existiert.
3.0321 Wohl k(cid:246)nnen wir einen Sachverhalt r(cid:228)umlich darstellen, welcher
den Gesetzen der Physik, aber keinen, der den Gesetzen der
Geometrie zuwiderliefe.
3.04 Ein a priori richtiger Gedanke w(cid:228)re ein solcher, dessen M(cid:246)glich-
keit seine Wahrheit bedingte.
3.05 Nur so k(cid:246)nnten wir a priori wissen, dass ein Gedanke wahr ist,
wenn aus dem Gedanken selbst (ohne Vergleichsobjekt) seine
Wahrheit zu erkennen w(cid:228)re.
3.1 Im Satz dr(cid:252)ckt sich der Gedanke sinnlich wahrnehmbar aus.
3.11 Wir ben(cid:252)tzen das sinnlich wahrnehmbare Zeichen (Laut- oder
99

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Schriftzeichen etc.) des Satzes als Projektion der m(cid:246)glichen
Sachlage.
Die Projektionsmethode ist das Denken des Satz-Sinnes.
3.12 Das Zeichen, durch welches wir den Gedanken ausdr(cid:252)cken, nenne
ich das Satzzeichen. Und der Satz ist das Satzzeichen in seiner
projektiven Beziehung zur Welt.
3.13 Zum Satz geh(cid:246)rt alles, was zur Projektion geh(cid:246)rt; aber nicht das
Projizierte.
Also die M(cid:246)glichkeit des Projizierten, aber nicht dieses selbst.
Im Satz ist also sein Sinn noch nicht enthalten, wohl aber
die M(cid:246)glichkeit ihn auszudr(cid:252)cken.
((cid:18)Der Inhalt des Satzes(cid:16) heisst der Inhalt des sinnvollen Sat-
zes.)
Im Satz ist die Form seines Sinnes enthalten, aber nicht des-
sen Inhalt.
3.14 Das Satzzeichen besteht darin, dass sich seine Elemente, die
W(cid:246)rter, in ihm auf bestimmte Art und Weise zu einander ver-
halten.
Das Satzzeichen ist eine Tatsache.
3.141 Der Satz ist kein W(cid:246)rtergemisch.(cid:22)(Wie das musikalische The-
ma kein Gemisch von T(cid:246)nen.)
Der Satz ist artikuliert.
3.142 Nur Tatsachen k(cid:246)nnen einen Sinn ausdr(cid:252)cken, eine Klasse von
Namen kann es nicht.
3.143 Dass das Satzzeichen eine Tatsache ist, wird durch die gew(cid:246)hn-
liche Ausdrucksform der Schrift oder des Druckes verschleiert.
Denn im gedruckten Satz z. B. sieht das Satzzeichen nicht
wesentlich verschieden aus vom Wort.
(So war es m(cid:246)glich, dass Frege den Satz einen zusammenge-
setzten Namen nannte.)
3.1431 Sehr klar wird das Wesen des Satzzeichens, wenn wir es uns, statt
aus Schriftzeichen, aus r(cid:228)umlichen Gegenst(cid:228)nden (etwa Tischen,
St(cid:252)hlen, B(cid:252)chern) zusammengesetzt denken.
Die gegenseitige r(cid:228)umliche Lage dieser Dinge dr(cid:252)ckt dann
den Sinn des Satzes aus.
100

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
3.1432 Nicht: (cid:18)Das komplexe Zeichen (cid:13)aRb‘ sagt, dass a in der Bezie-
hung R zu b steht(cid:16), sondern: Dass (cid:18)a(cid:16) in einer gewissen Bezie-
hung zu (cid:18)b(cid:16) steht, sagt, dass aRb.
3.144 Sachlagen kann man beschreiben, nicht b enennen.
(Namen gleichen Punkten, S(cid:228)tze Pfeilen, sie haben Sinn.)
3.2 Im Satze kann der Gedanke so ausgedr(cid:252)ckt sein, dass den Gegen-
st(cid:228)nden des Gedankens Elemente des Satzzeichens entsprechen.
3.201 Diese Elemente nenne ich (cid:18)einfache Zeichen(cid:16) und den Satz (cid:18)voll-
st(cid:228)ndig analysiert(cid:16).
3.202 Die im Satze angewandten einfachen Zeichen heissen Namen.
3.203 Der Name bedeutet den Gegenstand. Der Gegenstand ist seine
Bedeutung. ((cid:18)A(cid:16) ist dasselbe Zeichen wie (cid:18)A(cid:16).)
3.21 Der Kon(cid:28)guration der einfachen Zeichen im Satzzeichen ent-
spricht die Kon(cid:28)guration der Gegenst(cid:228)nde in der Sachlage.
3.22 Der Name vertritt im Satz den Gegenstand.
3.221 Die Gegenst(cid:228)nde kann ich nur nennen. Zeichen vertreten sie.
Ich kann nur von ihnen sprechen, sie aussprechen kann
ich nicht. Ein Satz kann nur sagen, wie ein Ding ist, nicht was
es ist.
3.23 Die Forderung der M(cid:246)glichkeit der einfachen Zeichen ist die For-
derung der Bestimmtheit des Sinnes.
3.24 Der Satz, welcher vom Komplex handelt, steht in interner Be-
ziehung zum Satze, der von dessen Bestandteil handelt.
Der Komplex kann nur durch seine Beschreibung gegeben
sein, und diese wird stimmen oder nicht stimmen. Der Satz, in
welchem von einem Komplex die Rede ist, wird, wenn dieser
nicht existiert, nicht unsinnig, sondern einfach falsch sein.
Dass ein Satzelement einen Komplex bezeichnet, kann man
aus einer Unbestimmtheit in den S(cid:228)tzen sehen, worin es vor-
kommt. Wir wissen, durch diesen Satz ist noch nicht alles
bestimmt. (Die Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung enth(cid:228)lt ja ein Ur-
bild.)
Die Zusammenfassung des Symbols eines Komplexes in ein
einfaches Symbol kann durch eine De(cid:28)nition ausgedr(cid:252)ckt wer-
den.
101

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
3.25 Es gibt eine und nur eine vollst(cid:228)ndige Analyse des Satzes.
3.251 Der Satz dr(cid:252)ckt auf bestimmte, klar angebbare Weise aus, was
er ausdr(cid:252)ckt: Der Satz ist artikuliert.
3.26 Der Name ist durch keine De(cid:28)nition weiter zu zergliedern: er ist
ein Urzeichen.
3.261 Jedes de(cid:28)nierte Zeichen bezeichnet (cid:252)b er jene Zeichen, durch
welche es de(cid:28)niert wurde; und die De(cid:28)nitionen weisen den Weg.
Zwei Zeichen, ein Urzeichen, und ein durch Urzeichen de-
(cid:28)niertes, k(cid:246)nnen nicht auf dieselbe Art und Weise bezeichnen.
Namen kann man nicht durch De(cid:28)nitionen auseinanderlegen.
(Kein Zeichen, welches allein, selbst(cid:228)ndig eine Bedeutung hat.)
3.262 Was in den Zeichen nicht zum Ausdruck kommt, das zeigt ih-
re Anwendung. Was die Zeichen verschlucken, das spricht ihre
Anwendung aus.
3.263 Die Bedeutungen von Urzeichen k(cid:246)nnen durch Erl(cid:228)uterungen
erkl(cid:228)rt werden. Erl(cid:228)uterungen sind S(cid:228)tze, welche die Urzeichen
enthalten. Sie k(cid:246)nnen also nur verstanden werden, wenn die Be-
deutungen dieser Zeichen bereits bekannt sind.
3.3 Nur der Satz hat Sinn; nur im Zusammenhange des Satzes hat
ein Name Bedeutung.
3.31 Jeden Teil des Satzes, der seinen Sinn charakterisiert, nenne ich
einen Ausdruck (ein Symbol).
(Der Satz selbst ist ein Ausdruck.)
Ausdruck ist alles, f(cid:252)r den Sinn des Satzes wesentliche, was
S(cid:228)tze miteinander gemein haben k(cid:246)nnen.
Der Ausdruck kennzeichnet eine Form und einen Inhalt.
3.311 Der Ausdruck setzt die Formen aller S(cid:228)tze voraus, in welchen
er vorkommen kann. Er ist das gemeinsame charakteristische
Merkmal einer Klasse von S(cid:228)tzen.
3.312 Er wird also dargestellt durch die allgemeine Form der S(cid:228)tze,
die er charakterisiert.
Und zwar wird in dieser Form der Ausdruck konstant und
alles (cid:252)brige variab el sein.
3.313 Der Ausdruck wird also durch eine Variable dargestellt, deren
Werte die S(cid:228)tze sind, die den Ausdruck enthalten.
102

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
(Im Grenzfall wird die Variable zur Konstanten, der Aus-
druck zum Satz.)
Ich nenne eine solche Variable (cid:18)Satzvariable(cid:16).
3.314 Der Ausdruck hat nur im Satz Bedeutung. Jede Variable l(cid:228)sst
sich als Satzvariable au(cid:27)assen.
(Auch der variable Name.)
3.315 Verwandeln wir einen Bestandteil eines Satzes in eine Variable,
so gibt es eine Klasse von S(cid:228)tzen, welche s(cid:228)mtlich Werte des
so entstandenen variablen Satzes sind. Diese Klasse h(cid:228)ngt im
allgemeinen noch davon ab, was wir, nach willk(cid:252)rlicher (cid:220)ber-
einkunft, mit Teilen jenes Satzes meinen. Verwandeln wir aber
alle jene Zeichen, deren Bedeutung willk(cid:252)rlich bestimmt wurde,
in Variable, so gibt es nun noch immer eine solche Klasse. Die-
se aber ist nun von keiner (cid:220)bereinkunft abh(cid:228)ngig, sondern nur
noch von der Natur des Satzes. Sie entspricht einer logischen
Form(cid:22)einem logischen Urbild.
3.316 Welche Werte die Satzvariable annehmen darf, wird festgesetzt.
Die Festsetzung der Werte ist die Variable.
3.317 Die Festsetzung der Werte der Satzvariablen ist die Angab e
der S(cid:228)tze, deren gemeinsames Merkmal die Variable ist.
Die Festsetzung ist eine Beschreibung dieser S(cid:228)tze.
Die Festsetzung wird also nur von Symbolen, nicht von deren
Bedeutung handeln.
Und nur dies ist der Festsetzung wesentlich, dass sie nur
eine Beschreibung von Symb olen ist und nichts
(cid:252)b er das Bezeichnete aussagt.
Wie die Beschreibung der S(cid:228)tze geschieht, ist unwesentlich.
3.318 Den Satz fasse ich(cid:22)wie Frege und Russell(cid:22)als Funktion der in
ihm enthaltenen Ausdr(cid:252)cke auf.
3.32 Das Zeichen ist das sinnlich Wahrnehmbare am Symbol.
3.321 Zwei verschiedene Symbole k(cid:246)nnen also das Zeichen (Schrift-
zeichen oder Lautzeichen etc.) miteinander gemein haben(cid:22)sie
bezeichnen dann auf verschiedene Art und Weise.
3.322 Es kann nie das gemeinsame Merkmal zweier Gegenst(cid:228)nde an-
zeigen, dass wir sie mit demselben Zeichen, aber durch zwei
103

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
verschiedene Bezeichnungsweisen bezeichnen. Denn das
Zeichen ist ja willk(cid:252)rlich. Man k(cid:246)nnte also auch zwei verschiede-
ne Zeichen w(cid:228)hlen, und wo bliebe dann das Gemeinsame in der
Bezeichnung.
3.323 In der Umgangssprache kommt es ungemein h(cid:228)u(cid:28)g vor, dass
dasselbe Wort auf verschiedene Art und Weise bezeichnet(cid:22)also
verschiedenen Symbolen angeh(cid:246)rt(cid:22), oder, dass zwei W(cid:246)rter, die
auf verschiedene Art und Weise bezeichnen, (cid:228)usserlich in der
gleichen Weise im Satze angewandt werden.
So erscheint das Wort (cid:18)ist(cid:16) als Kopula, als Gleichheitszei-
chen und als Ausdruck der Existenz; (cid:18)existieren(cid:16) als intransiti-
ves Zeitwort wie (cid:18)gehen(cid:16); (cid:18)identisch(cid:16) als Eigenschaftswort; wir
reden von Etwas, aber auch davon, dass etwas geschieht.
(Im Satze (cid:18)Gr(cid:252)n ist gr(cid:252)n(cid:16)(cid:22)wo das erste Wort ein Perso-
nenname, das letzte ein Eigenschaftswort ist(cid:22)haben diese Wor-
te nicht einfach verschiedene Bedeutung, sondern es sind ver-
schiedene Symb ole.)
3.324 So entstehen leicht die fundamentalsten Verwechslungen (deren
die ganze Philosophie voll ist).
3.325 Um diesen Irrt(cid:252)mern zu entgehen, m(cid:252)ssen wir eine Zeichen-
sprache verwenden, welche sie ausschliesst, indem sie nicht das
gleiche Zeichen in verschiedenen Symbolen, und Zeichen, welche
auf verschiedene Art bezeichnen, nicht (cid:228)usserlich auf die gleiche
Art verwendet. Eine Zeichensprache also, die der logischen
Grammatik(cid:22)der logischen Syntax(cid:22)gehorcht.
(Die Begri(cid:27)sschrift Frege’s und Russell’s ist eine solche Spra-
che, die allerdings noch nicht alle Fehler ausschliesst.)
3.326 Um das Symbol am Zeichen zu erkennen, muss man auf den
sinnvollen Gebrauch achten.
3.327 Das Zeichen bestimmt erst mit seiner logisch-syntaktischen Ver-
wendung zusammen eine logische Form.
3.328 Wird ein Zeichen nicht gebraucht, so ist es bedeutungslos.
Das ist der Sinn der Devise Occams.
(Wenn sich alles so verh(cid:228)lt als h(cid:228)tte ein Zeichen Bedeutung,
dann hat es auch Bedeutung.)
104

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
3.33 In der logischen Syntax darf nie die Bedeutung eines Zeichens
eine Rolle spielen; sie muss sich aufstellen lassen, ohne dass dabei
von der Bedeutung eines Zeichens die Rede w(cid:228)re, sie darf nur
die Beschreibung der Ausdr(cid:252)cke voraussetzen.
3.331 Von dieser Bemerkung sehen wir in Russell’s (cid:18)Theory of types(cid:16)
hin(cid:252)ber: Der Irrtum Russell’s zeigt sich darin, dass er bei der
Aufstellung der Zeichenregeln von der Bedeutung der Zeichen
reden musste.
3.332 Kein Satz kann etwas (cid:252)ber sich selbst aussagen, weil das Satzzei-
chen nicht in sich selbst enthalten sein kann, (das ist die ganze
(cid:18)Theory of types(cid:16)).
3.333 Eine Funktion kann darum nicht ihr eigenes Argument sein, weil
das Funktionszeichen bereits das Urbild seines Arguments ent-
h(cid:228)lt und es sich nicht selbst enthalten kann.
Nehmen wir n(cid:228)mlich an, die Funktion F(fx) k(cid:246)nnte ihr ei-
genes Argument sein; dann g(cid:228)be es also einen Satz: (cid:18)F(F(fx))(cid:16)
und in diesem m(cid:252)ssen die (cid:228)ussere Funktion F und die innere
Funktion F verschiedene Bedeutungen haben, denn die innere
hat die Form ϕ(fx), die (cid:228)ussere, die Form ψ(ϕ(fx)). Gemein-
sam ist den beiden Funktionen nur der Buchstabe (cid:18)F(cid:16), der aber
allein nichts bezeichnet.
Dies wird sofort klar, wenn wir statt (cid:18)F(F(u))(cid:16) schreiben
(cid:18)(∃ϕ) : F(ϕu) . ϕu = Fu(cid:16).
Hiermit erledigt sich Russell’s Paradox.
3.334 Die Regeln der logischen Syntax m(cid:252)ssen sich von selbst verste-
hen, wenn man nur weiss, wie ein jedes Zeichen bezeichnet.
3.34 Der Satz besitzt wesentliche und zuf(cid:228)llige Z(cid:252)ge.
Zuf(cid:228)llig sind die Z(cid:252)ge, die von der besonderen Art der Her-
vorbringung des Satzzeichens herr(cid:252)hren. Wesentlich diejenigen,
welche allein den Satz bef(cid:228)higen, seinen Sinn auszudr(cid:252)cken.
3.341 Das Wesentliche am Satz ist also das, was allen S(cid:228)tzen, welche
den gleichen Sinn ausdr(cid:252)cken k(cid:246)nnen, gemeinsam ist.
Und ebenso ist allgemein das Wesentliche am Symbol das,
was alle Symbole, die denselben Zweck erf(cid:252)llen k(cid:246)nnen, gemein-
sam haben.
105

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
3.3411 Man k(cid:246)nnte also sagen: Der eigentliche Name ist das, was alle
Symbole, die den Gegenstand bezeichnen, gemeinsam haben. Es
w(cid:252)rde sich so successive ergeben, dass keinerlei Zusammenset-
zung f(cid:252)r den Namen wesentlich ist.
3.342 An unseren Notationen ist zwar etwas willk(cid:252)rlich, aber das ist
nicht willk(cid:252)rlich: Dass, wenn wir etwas willk(cid:252)rlich bestimmt
haben, dann etwas anderes der Fall sein muss. (Dies h(cid:228)ngt von
dem Wesen der Notation ab.)
3.3421 Eine besondere Bezeichnungsweise mag unwichtig sein, aber
wichtig ist es immer, dass diese eine m(cid:246)gliche Bezeichnungs-
weise ist. Und so verh(cid:228)lt es sich in der Philosophie (cid:252)berhaupt:
Das Einzelne erweist sich immer wieder als unwichtig, aber die
M(cid:246)glichkeit jedes Einzelnen gibt uns einen Aufschluss (cid:252)ber das
Wesen der Welt.
3.343 De(cid:28)nitionen sind Regeln der (cid:220)bersetzung von einer Sprache in
eine andere. Jede richtige Zeichensprache muss sich in jede an-
dere nach solchen Regeln (cid:252)bersetzen lassen: Dies ist, was sie
alle gemeinsam haben.
3.344 Das, was am Symbol bezeichnet, ist das Gemeinsame aller jener
Symbole, durch die das erste den Regeln der logischen Syntax
zufolge ersetzt werden kann.
3.3441 Man kann z. B. das Gemeinsame aller Notationen f(cid:252)r die Wahr-
heitsfunktionen so ausdr(cid:252)cken: Es ist ihnen gemeinsam, dass sich
alle(cid:22)z. B.(cid:22)durch die Notation von (cid:18) ∼p(cid:16) ((cid:18)nicht p(cid:16)) und (cid:18)p∨q(cid:16)
((cid:18)p oder q(cid:16)) ersetzen lassen.
(Hiermit ist die Art und Weise gekennzeichnet, wie eine
spezielle m(cid:246)gliche Notation uns allgemeine Aufschl(cid:252)sse geben
kann.)
3.3442 Das Zeichen des Komplexes l(cid:246)st sich auch bei der Analyse nicht
willk(cid:252)rlich auf, so dass etwa seine Au(cid:29)(cid:246)sung in jedem Satzgef(cid:252)ge
eine andere w(cid:228)re.
3.4 Der Satz bestimmt einen Ort im logischen Raum. Die Existenz
dieses logischen Ortes ist durch die Existenz der Bestandteile
allein verb(cid:252)rgt, durch die Existenz des sinnvollen Satzes.
3.41 Das Satzzeichen und die logischen Koordinaten: Das ist der lo-
gische Ort.
106

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
3.411 Der geometrische und der logische Ort stimmen darin (cid:252)berein,
dass beide die M(cid:246)glichkeit einer Existenz sind.
3.42 Obwohl der Satz nur einen Ort des logischen Raumes bestimmen
darf, so muss doch durch ihn schon der ganze logische Raum
gegeben sein.
(Sonst w(cid:252)rden durch die Verneinung, die logische Summe,
das logische Produkt, etc. immer neue Elemente(cid:22)in Koordina-
tion(cid:22)eingef(cid:252)hrt.)
(Das logische Ger(cid:252)st um das Bild herum bestimmt den logi-
schen Raum. Der Satz durchgreift den ganzen logischen Raum.)
3.5 Das angewandte, gedachte, Satzzeichen ist der Gedanke.
4 Der Gedanke ist der sinnvolle Satz.
4.001 Die Gesamtheit der S(cid:228)tze ist die Sprache.
4.002 Der Mensch besitzt die F(cid:228)higkeit Sprachen zu bauen, womit sich
jeder Sinn ausdr(cid:252)cken l(cid:228)sst, ohne eine Ahnung davon zu haben,
wie und was jedes Wort bedeutet.(cid:22)Wie man auch spricht, ohne
zu wissen, wie die einzelnen Laute hervorgebracht werden.
Die Umgangssprache ist ein Teil des menschlichen Organis-
mus und nicht weniger kompliziert als dieser.
Es ist menschenunm(cid:246)glich, die Sprachlogik aus ihr unmittel-
bar zu entnehmen.
Die Sprache verkleidet den Gedanken. Und zwar so, dass
man nach der (cid:228)usseren Form des Kleides, nicht auf die Form des
bekleideten Gedankens schliessen kann; weil die (cid:228)ussere Form
des Kleides nach ganz anderen Zwecken gebildet ist, als danach,
die Form des K(cid:246)rpers erkennen zu lassen.
Die stillschweigenden Abmachungen zum Verst(cid:228)ndnis der
Umgangssprache sind enorm kompliziert.
4.003 Die meisten S(cid:228)tze und Fragen, welche (cid:252)ber philosophische Din-
ge geschrieben worden sind, sind nicht falsch, sondern unsinnig.
Wir k(cid:246)nnen daher Fragen dieser Art (cid:252)berhaupt nicht beantwor-
ten, sondern nur ihre Unsinnigkeit feststellen. Die meisten Fra-
gen und S(cid:228)tze der Philosophen beruhen darauf, dass wir unsere
Sprachlogik nicht verstehen.
(Sie sind von der Art der Frage, ob das Gute mehr oder
weniger identisch sei als das Sch(cid:246)ne.)
107

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Und es ist nicht verwunderlich, dass die tiefsten Probleme
eigentlich keine Probleme sind.
4.0031 Alle Philosophie ist (cid:18)Sprachkritik(cid:16). (Allerdings nicht im Sinne
Mauthners.) Russell’s Verdienst ist es, gezeigt zu haben, dass
die scheinbare logische Form des Satzes nicht seine wirkliche
sein muss.
4.01 Der Satz ist ein Bild der Wirklichkeit.
Der Satz ist ein Modell der Wirklichkeit, so wie wir sie uns
denken.
4.011 Auf den ersten Blick scheint der Satz(cid:22)wie er etwa auf dem
Papier gedruckt steht(cid:22)kein Bild der Wirklichkeit zu sein, von
der er handelt. Aber auch die Notenschrift scheint auf den ers-
ten Blick kein Bild der Musik zu sein, und unsere Lautzeichen-
(Buchstaben-)Schrift kein Bild unserer Lautsprache.
Und doch erweisen sich diese Zeichensprachen auch im ge-
w(cid:246)hnlichen Sinne als Bilder dessen, was sie darstellen.
4.012 O(cid:27)enbar ist, dass wir einen Satz von der Form (cid:18)aRb(cid:16) als Bild
emp(cid:28)nden. Hier ist das Zeichen o(cid:27)enbar ein Gleichnis des Be-
zeichneten.
4.013 Und wenn wir in das Wesentliche dieser Bildhaftigkeit eindrin-
gen, so sehen wir, dass dieselbe durch scheinbare Unre-
gelm(cid:228)ssigkeiten (wie die Verwendung der ♯ und ♭ in der
Notenschrift) nicht gest(cid:246)rt wird.
Denn auch diese Unregelm(cid:228)ssigkeiten bilden das ab, was sie
ausdr(cid:252)cken sollen; nur auf eine andere Art und Weise.
4.014 Die Grammophonplatte, der musikalische Gedanke, die Noten-
schrift, die Schallwellen, stehen alle in jener abbildenden inter-
nen Beziehung zu einander, die zwischen Sprache und Welt be-
steht.
Ihnen allen ist der logische Bau gemeinsam.
(Wie im M(cid:228)rchen die zwei J(cid:252)nglinge, ihre zwei Pferde und
ihre Lilien. Sie sind alle in gewissem Sinne Eins.)
4.0141 Dass es eine allgemeine Regel gibt, durch die der Musiker aus
der Partitur die Symphonie entnehmen kann, durch welche man
aus der Linie auf der Grammophonplatte die Symphonie und
108

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
nach der ersten Regel wieder die Partitur ableiten kann, dar-
in besteht eben die innere ˜hnlichkeit dieser scheinbar so ganz
verschiedenen Gebilde. Und jene Regel ist das Gesetz der Pro-
jektion, welches die Symphonie in die Notensprache projiziert.
Sie ist die Regel der (cid:220)bersetzung der Notensprache in die Spra-
che der Grammophonplatte.
4.015 Die M(cid:246)glichkeit aller Gleichnisse, der ganzen Bildhaftigkeit un-
serer Ausdrucksweise, ruht in der Logik der Abbildung.
4.016 Um das Wesen des Satzes zu verstehen, denken wir an die Hiero-
glyphenschrift, welche die Tatsachen die sie beschreibt abbildet.
Und aus ihr wurde die Buchstabenschrift, ohne das Wesent-
liche der Abbildung zu verlieren.
4.02 Dies sehen wir daraus, dass wir den Sinn des Satzzeichens ver-
stehen, ohne dass er uns erkl(cid:228)rt wurde.
4.021 Der Satz ist ein Bild der Wirklichkeit: Denn ich kenne die von
ihm dargestellte Sachlage, wenn ich den Satz verstehe. Und den
Satz verstehe ich, ohne dass mir sein Sinn erkl(cid:228)rt wurde.
4.022 Der Satz zeigt seinen Sinn.
Der Satz zeigt, wie es sich verh(cid:228)lt, wenn er wahr ist. Und
er sagt, dass es sich so verh(cid:228)lt.
4.023 Die Wirklichkeit muss durch den Satz auf ja oder nein (cid:28)xiert
sein.
Dazu muss sie durch ihn vollst(cid:228)ndig beschrieben werden.
Der Satz ist die Beschreibung eines Sachverhaltes.
Wie die Beschreibung einen Gegenstand nach seinen exter-
nen Eigenschaften, so beschreibt der Satz die Wirklichkeit nach
ihren internen Eigenschaften.
Der Satz konstruiert eine Welt mit Hilfe eines logischen Ge-
r(cid:252)stes und darum kann man am Satz auch sehen, wie sich al-
les Logische verh(cid:228)lt, wenn er wahr ist. Man kann aus einem
falschen Satz Schl(cid:252)sse ziehen.
4.024 Einen Satz verstehen, heisst, wissen was der Fall ist, wenn er
wahr ist.
(Man kann ihn also verstehen, ohne zu wissen, ob er wahr
ist.)
109

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Man versteht ihn, wenn man seine Bestandteile versteht.
4.025 Die (cid:220)bersetzung einer Sprache in eine andere geht nicht so vor
sich, dass man jeden Satz der einen in einen Satz der anderen
(cid:252)bersetzt, sondern nur die Satzbestandteile werden (cid:252)bersetzt.
(Und das W(cid:246)rterbuch (cid:252)bersetzt nicht nur Substantiva, son-
dern auch Zeit-, Eigenschafts- und Bindew(cid:246)rter etc.; und es be-
handelt sie alle gleich.)
4.026 Die Bedeutungen der einfachen Zeichen (der W(cid:246)rter) m(cid:252)ssen
uns erkl(cid:228)rt werden, dass wir sie verstehen.
Mit den S(cid:228)tzen aber verst(cid:228)ndigen wir uns.
4.027 Es liegt im Wesen des Satzes, dass er uns einen neuen Sinn
mitteilen kann.
4.03 Ein Satz muss mit alten Ausdr(cid:252)cken einen neuen Sinn mitteilen.
Der Satz teilt uns eine Sachlage mit, also muss er wesent-
lich mit der Sachlage zusammenh(cid:228)ngen.
Und der Zusammenhang ist eben, dass er ihr logisches Bild
ist.
Der Satz sagt nur insoweit etwas aus, als er ein Bild ist.
4.031 Im Satz wird gleichsam eine Sachlage probeweise zusammenge-
stellt.
Man kann geradezu sagen: statt, dieser Satz hat diesen und
diesen Sinn; dieser Satz stellt diese und diese Sachlage dar.
4.0311 Ein Name steht f(cid:252)r ein Ding, ein anderer f(cid:252)r ein anderes Ding
und untereinander sind sie verbunden, so stellt das Ganze(cid:22)wie
ein lebendes Bild(cid:22)den Sachverhalt vor.
4.0312 Die M(cid:246)glichkeit des Satzes beruht auf dem Prinzip der Vertre-
tung von Gegenst(cid:228)nden durch Zeichen.
Mein Grundgedanke ist, dass die (cid:18)logischen Konstanten(cid:16)
nicht vertreten. Dass sich die Logik der Tatsachen nicht ver-
treten l(cid:228)sst.
4.032 Nur insoweit ist der Satz ein Bild einer Sachlage, als er logisch
gegliedert ist.
(Auch der Satz (cid:18)ambulo(cid:16) ist zusammengesetzt, denn sein
Stamm ergibt mit einer anderen Endung und seine Endung mit
einem anderen Stamm, einen anderen Sinn.)
110

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
4.04 Am Satz muss gerade soviel zu unterscheiden sein, als an der
Sachlage die er darstellt.
Die beiden m(cid:252)ssen die gleiche logische (mathematische)
Mannigfaltigkeit besitzen. (Vergleiche Hertz’s Mechanik, (cid:252)ber
Dynamische Modelle.)
4.041 Diese mathematische Mannigfaltigkeit kann man nat(cid:252)rlich nicht
selbst wieder abbilden. Aus ihr kann man beim Abbilden nicht
heraus.
4.0411 Wollten wir z. B. das, was wir durch (cid:18)(x)fx(cid:16) ausdr(cid:252)cken, durch
Vorsetzen eines Indexes vor (cid:18)fx(cid:16) ausdr(cid:252)cken(cid:22)etwa so: (cid:18)Alg.
fx(cid:16), es w(cid:252)rde nicht gen(cid:252)gen(cid:22)wir w(cid:252)ssten nicht, was verallge-
meinert wurde. Wollten wir es durch einen Index (cid:18)a(cid:16) anzeigen(cid:22)
etwa so: (cid:18)f(x )(cid:16)(cid:22)es w(cid:252)rde auch nicht gen(cid:252)gen(cid:22)wir w(cid:252)ssten
a
nicht den Bereich der Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung.
Wollten wir es durch Einf(cid:252)hrung einer Marke in die Argu-
mentstellen versuchen(cid:22)etwa so: (cid:18)(A,A) . F(A,A)(cid:16)(cid:22)es w(cid:252)rde
nicht gen(cid:252)gen(cid:22)wir k(cid:246)nnten die Identit(cid:228)t der Variablen nicht
feststellen. U.s.w.
Alle diese Bezeichnungsweisen gen(cid:252)gen nicht, weil sie nicht
die notwendige mathematische Mannigfaltigkeit haben.
4.0412 Aus demselben Grunde gen(cid:252)gt die idealistische Erkl(cid:228)rung des
Sehens der r(cid:228)umlichen Beziehungen durch die (cid:18)Raumbrille(cid:16)
nicht, weil sie nicht die Mannigfaltigkeit dieser Beziehungen
erkl(cid:228)ren kann.
4.05 Die Wirklichkeit wird mit dem Satz verglichen.
4.06 Nur dadurch kann der Satz wahr oder falsch sein, indem er ein
Bild der Wirklichkeit ist.
4.061 Beachtet man nicht, dass der Satz einen von den Tatsachen un-
abh(cid:228)ngigen Sinn hat, so kann man leicht glauben, dass wahr und
falsch gleichberechtigte Beziehungen von Zeichen und Bezeich-
netem sind.
Man k(cid:246)nnte dann z. B. sagen, dass (cid:18)p(cid:16) auf die wahre Art
bezeichnet, was (cid:18)
∼p(cid:16)
auf die falsche Art, etc.
4.062 Kann man sich nicht mit falschen S(cid:228)tzen, wie bisher mit wahren,
verst(cid:228)ndigen? Solange man nur weiss, dass sie falsch gemeint
111

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
sind. Nein! Denn, wahr ist ein Satz, wenn es sich so verh(cid:228)lt,
wie wir es durch ihn sagen; und wenn wir mit (cid:18)p(cid:16) ∼p meinen,
und es sich so verh(cid:228)lt wie wir es meinen, so ist (cid:18)p(cid:16) in der neuen
Au(cid:27)assung wahr und nicht falsch.
4.0621 Dass aber die Zeichen (cid:18)p(cid:16) und (cid:18) ∼p(cid:16) das gleiche sagen k(cid:246)n-
∼
nen, ist wichtig. Denn es zeigt, dass dem Zeichen (cid:18) (cid:16) in der
Wirklichkeit nichts entspricht.
Dass in einem Satz die Verneinung vorkommt, ist noch kein
Merkmal seines Sinnes ( ∼∼p = p).
Die S(cid:228)tze (cid:18)p(cid:16) und (cid:18) ∼p(cid:16) haben entgegengesetzten Sinn, aber
es entspricht ihnen eine und dieselbe Wirklichkeit.
4.063 Ein Bild zur Erkl(cid:228)rung des Wahrheitsbegri(cid:27)es: Schwarzer Fleck
auf weissem Papier; die Form des Fleckes kann man beschreiben,
indem man f(cid:252)r jeden Punkt der Fl(cid:228)che angibt, ob er weiss oder
schwarz ist. Der Tatsache, dass ein Punkt schwarz ist, entspricht
eine positive(cid:22)der, dass ein Punkt weiss (nicht schwarz) ist, eine
negative Tatsache. Bezeichne ich einen Punkt der Fl(cid:228)che (einen
Frege’schen Wahrheitswert), so entspricht dies der Annahme, die
zur Beurteilung aufgestellt wird, etc. etc.
Um aber sagen zu k(cid:246)nnen, ein Punkt sei schwarz oder weiss,
muss ich vorerst wissen, wann man einen Punkt schwarz und
wann man ihn weiss nennt; um sagen zu k(cid:246)nnen: (cid:18)p(cid:16) ist wahr
(oder falsch), muss ich bestimmt haben, unter welchen Umst(cid:228)n-
den ich (cid:18)p(cid:16) wahr nenne, und damit bestimme ich den Sinn des
Satzes.
Der Punkt an dem das Gleichnis hinkt ist nun der: Wir k(cid:246)n-
nen auf einen Punkt des Papiers zeigen, auch ohne zu wissen, was
weiss und schwarz ist; einem Satz ohne Sinn aber entspricht gar
nichts, denn er bezeichnet kein Ding (Wahrheitswert) dessen Ei-
genschaften etwa (cid:18)falsch(cid:16) oder (cid:18)wahr(cid:16) hiessen; das Verbum eines
Satzes ist nicht (cid:18)ist wahr(cid:16) oder (cid:18)ist falsch(cid:16)(cid:22)wie Frege glaubte(cid:22),
sondern das, was (cid:18)wahr ist(cid:16) muss das Verbum schon enthalten.
4.064 Jeder Satz muss schon einen Sinn haben; die Bejahung kann
ihn ihm nicht geben, denn sie bejaht ja gerade den Sinn. Und
dasselbe gilt von der Verneinung, etc.
4.0641 Man k(cid:246)nnte sagen: Die Verneinung bezieht sich schon auf den
logischen Ort, den der verneinte Satz bestimmt.
112

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Der verneinende Satz bestimmt einen anderen logischen
Ort als der verneinte.
Der verneinende Satz bestimmt einen logischen Ort mit Hilfe
des logischen Ortes des verneinten Satzes, indem er jenen aus-
serhalb diesem liegend beschreibt.
Dass man den verneinten Satz wieder verneinen kann, zeigt
schon, dass das, was verneint wird, schon ein Satz und nicht erst
die Vorbereitung zu einem Satze ist.
4.1 Der Satz stellt das Bestehen und Nichtbestehen der Sachverhalte
dar.
4.11 Die Gesamtheit der wahren S(cid:228)tze ist die gesamte Naturwissen-
schaft (oder die Gesamtheit der Naturwissenschaften).
4.111 Die Philosophie ist keine der Naturwissenschaften.
(Das Wort (cid:18)Philosophie(cid:16) muss etwas bedeuten, was (cid:252)ber oder
unter, aber nicht neben den Naturwissenschaften steht.)
4.112 Der Zweck der Philosophie ist die logische Kl(cid:228)rung der Gedan-
ken.
Die Philosophie ist keine Lehre, sondern eine T(cid:228)tigkeit.
Ein philosophisches Werk besteht wesentlich aus Erl(cid:228)uterun-
gen.
Das Resultat der Philosophie sind nicht (cid:18)philosophische S(cid:228)t-
ze(cid:16), sondern das Klarwerden von S(cid:228)tzen.
Die Philosophie soll die Gedanken, die sonst, gleichsam, tr(cid:252)-
be und verschwommen sind, klar machen und scharf abgrenzen.
4.1121 Die Psychologie ist der Philosophie nicht verwandter als irgend
eine andere Naturwissenschaft.
Erkenntnistheorie ist die Philosophie der Psychologie.
Entspricht nicht mein Studium der Zeichensprache dem Stu-
dium der Denkprozesse, welches die Philosophen f(cid:252)r die Philo-
sophie der Logik f(cid:252)r so wesentlich hielten? Nur verwickelten sie
sich meistens in unwesentliche psychologische Untersuchungen
und eine analoge Gefahr gibt es auch bei meiner Methode.
4.1122 Die Darwinsche Theorie hat mit der Philosophie nicht mehr
zu scha(cid:27)en, als irgend eine andere Hypothese der Naturwissen-
schaft.
113

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
4.113 Die Philosophie begrenzt das bestreitbare Gebiet der Naturwis-
senschaft.
4.114 Sie soll das Denkbare abgrenzen und damit das Undenkbare.
Sie soll das Undenkbare von innen durch das Denkbare be-
grenzen.
4.115 Sie wird das Unsagbare bedeuten, indem sie das Sagbare klar
darstellt.
4.116 Alles was (cid:252)berhaupt gedacht werden kann, kann klar gedacht
werden. Alles was sich aussprechen l(cid:228)sst, l(cid:228)sst sich klar ausspre-
chen.
4.12 Der Satz kann die gesamte Wirklichkeit darstellen, aber er kann
nicht das darstellen, was er mit der Wirklichkeit gemein haben
muss, um sie darstellen zu k(cid:246)nnen(cid:22)die logische Form.
Um die logische Form darstellen zu k(cid:246)nnen, m(cid:252)ssten wir uns
mit dem Satze ausserhalb der Logik aufstellen k(cid:246)nnen, das heisst
ausserhalb der Welt.
4.121 Der Satz kann die logische Form nicht darstellen, sie spiegelt
sich in ihm.
Was sich in der Sprache spiegelt, kann sie nicht darstellen.
Was sich in der Sprache ausdr(cid:252)ckt, k(cid:246)nnen wir nicht durch
sie ausdr(cid:252)cken.
Der Satz zeigt die logische Form der Wirklichkeit.
Er weist sie auf.
4.1211 So zeigt ein Satz (cid:18)fa(cid:16), dass in seinem Sinn der Gegenstand a
vorkommt, zwei S(cid:228)tze (cid:18)fa(cid:16) und (cid:18)ga(cid:16), dass in ihnen beiden von
demselben Gegenstand die Rede ist.
Wenn zwei S(cid:228)tze einander widersprechen, so zeigt dies ihre
Struktur; ebenso, wenn einer aus dem anderen folgt. U.s.w.
4.1212 Was gezeigt werden kann, kann nicht gesagt werden.
4.1213 Jetzt verstehen wir auch unser Gef(cid:252)hl: dass wir im Besitze einer
richtigen logischen Au(cid:27)assung seien, wenn nur einmal alles in
unserer Zeichensprache stimmt.
4.122 Wir k(cid:246)nnen in gewissem Sinne von formalen Eigenschaften der
Gegenst(cid:228)nde und Sachverhalte bezw. von Eigenschaften der
114

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Struktur der Tatsachen reden und in demselben Sinne von for-
malen Relationen und Relationen von Strukturen.
(Statt Eigenschaft der Struktur sage ich auch (cid:18)interne Eigen-
schaft(cid:16); statt Relation der Strukturen (cid:18)interne Relation(cid:16).
Ich f(cid:252)hre diese Ausdr(cid:252)cke ein, um den Grund der, bei den
Philosophen sehr verbreiteten Verwechslung zwischen den inter-
nen Relationen und den eigentlichen (externen) Relationen zu
zeigen.)
Das Bestehen solcher interner Eigenschaften und Relationen
kann aber nicht durch S(cid:228)tze behauptet werden, sondern es zeigt
sich in den S(cid:228)tzen, welche jene Sachverhalte darstellen und von
jenen Gegenst(cid:228)nden handeln.
4.1221 Eine interne Eigenschaft einer Tatsache k(cid:246)nnen wir auch einen
Zug dieser Tatsache nennen. (In dem Sinn, in welchem wir etwa
von Gesichtsz(cid:252)gen sprechen.)
4.123 Eine Eigenschaft ist intern, wenn es undenkbar ist, dass ihr Ge-
genstand sie nicht besitzt.
(Diese blaue Farbe und jene stehen in der internen Relation
von heller und dunkler eo ipso. Es ist undenkbar, dass diese
beiden Gegenst(cid:228)nde nicht in dieser Relation st(cid:252)nden.)
(Hier entspricht dem schwankenden Gebrauch der Worte (cid:18)Ei-
genschaft(cid:16) und (cid:18)Relation(cid:16) der schwankende Gebrauch des Wor-
tes (cid:18)Gegenstand(cid:16).)
4.124 Das Bestehen einer internen Eigenschaft einer m(cid:246)glichen Sach-
lage wird nicht durch einen Satz ausgedr(cid:252)ckt, sondern es dr(cid:252)ckt
sich in dem sie darstellenden Satz, durch eine interne Eigenschaft
dieses Satzes aus.
Es w(cid:228)re ebenso unsinnig, dem Satze eine formale Eigenschaft
zuzusprechen, als sie ihm abzusprechen.
4.1241 Formen kann man nicht dadurch von einander unterscheiden,
dass man sagt, die eine habe diese, die andere aber jene Eigen-
schaft; denn dies setzt voraus, dass es einen Sinn habe, beide
Eigenschaften von beiden Formen auszusagen.
4.125 Das Bestehen einer internen Relation zwischen m(cid:246)glichen Sach-
lagen dr(cid:252)ckt sich sprachlich durch eine interne Relation zwischen
den sie darstellenden S(cid:228)tzen aus.
115

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
4.1251 Hier erledigt sich nun die Streitfrage (cid:18)ob alle Relationen intern
oder extern(cid:16) seien.
4.1252 Reihen, welche durch interne Relationen geordnet sind, nenne
ich Formenreihen.
Die Zahlenreihe ist nicht nach einer externen, sondern nach
einer internen Relation geordnet.
Ebenso die Reihe der S(cid:228)tze (cid:18)aRb(cid:16), (cid:18)(∃x) : aRx . xRb(cid:16),
(cid:18)(∃x,y) : aRx . xRy . yRb(cid:16), u. s. f.
(Steht b in einer dieser Beziehungen zu a, so nenne ich b einen
Nachfolger von a.)
4.126 In dem Sinne, in welchem wir von formalen Eigenschaften spre-
chen, k(cid:246)nnen wir nun auch von formalen Begri(cid:27)en reden.
(Ich f(cid:252)hre diesen Ausdruck ein, um den Grund der Verwechs-
lung der formalen Begri(cid:27)e mit den eigentlichen Begri(cid:27)en, welche
die ganze alte Logik durchzieht, klar zu machen.)
Dass etwas unter einen formalen Begri(cid:27) als dessen Gegen-
stand f(cid:228)llt, kann nicht durch einen Satz ausgedr(cid:252)ckt werden.
Sondern es zeigt sich an dem Zeichen dieses Gegenstandes selbst.
(Der Name zeigt, dass er einen Gegenstand bezeichnet, das Zah-
lenzeichen, dass es eine Zahl bezeichnet etc.)
Die formalen Begri(cid:27)e k(cid:246)nnen ja nicht, wie die eigentlichen
Begri(cid:27)e, durch eine Funktion dargestellt werden.
Denn ihre Merkmale, die formalen Eigenschaften, werden
nicht durch Funktionen ausgedr(cid:252)ckt.
Der Ausdruck der formalen Eigenschaft ist ein Zug gewisser
Symbole.
Das Zeichen der Merkmale eines formalen Begri(cid:27)es ist al-
so ein charakteristischer Zug aller Symbole, deren Bedeutungen
unter den Begri(cid:27) fallen.
Der Ausdruck des formalen Begri(cid:27)es also, eine Satzvariable,
in welcher nur dieser charakteristische Zug konstant ist.
4.127 Die Satzvariable bezeichnet den formalen Begri(cid:27) und ihre Werte
die Gegenst(cid:228)nde, welche unter diesen Begri(cid:27) fallen.
4.1271 Jede Variable ist das Zeichen eines formalen Begri(cid:27)es.
Denn jede Variable stellt eine konstante Form dar, welche
116

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
alle ihre Werte besitzen, und die als formale Eigenschaft dieser
Werte aufgefasst werden kann.
4.1272 So ist der variable Name (cid:18)x(cid:16) das eigentliche Zeichen des Schein-
begri(cid:27)es Gegenstand.
Wo immer das Wort (cid:18)Gegenstand(cid:16) ((cid:18)Ding(cid:16), (cid:18)Sache(cid:16), etc.)
richtig gebraucht wird, wird es in der Begri(cid:27)sschrift durch den
variablen Namen ausgedr(cid:252)ckt.
Zum Beispiel in dem Satz (cid:18)es gibt 2 Gegenst(cid:228)nde, welche
...(cid:16) durch (cid:18)(∃x,y) ...(cid:16).
Wo immer es anders, also als eigentliches Begri(cid:27)swort ge-
braucht wird, entstehen unsinnige Scheins(cid:228)tze.
So kann man z. B. nicht sagen (cid:18)Es gibt Gegenst(cid:228)nde(cid:16), wie
man etwa sagt (cid:18)Es gibt B(cid:252)cher(cid:16). Und ebenso wenig (cid:18)Es gibt 100
Gegenst(cid:228)nde(cid:16), oder (cid:18)Es gibt ℵ Gegenst(cid:228)nde(cid:16).
0
Und es ist unsinnig, von der Anzahl aller Gegenst(cid:228)n-
de zu sprechen.
Dasselbe gilt von den Worten (cid:18)Komplex(cid:16), (cid:18)Tatsache(cid:16), (cid:18)Funk-
tion(cid:16), (cid:18)Zahl(cid:16), etc.
Sie alle bezeichnen formale Begri(cid:27)e und werden in der Be-
gri(cid:27)sschrift durch Variable, nicht durch Funktionen oder Klassen
dargestellt. (Wie Frege und Russell glaubten.)
Ausdr(cid:252)cke wie (cid:18)1 ist eine Zahl(cid:16), (cid:18)es gibt nur Eine Null(cid:16) und
alle (cid:228)hnlichen sind unsinnig.
(Es ist ebenso unsinnig zu sagen (cid:18)es gibt nur eine 1(cid:16), als es
unsinnig w(cid:228)re, zu sagen: 2 + 2 ist um 3 Uhr gleich 4.)
4.12721 Der formale Begri(cid:27) ist mit einem Gegenstand, der unter ihn f(cid:228)llt,
bereits gegeben. Man kann also nicht Gegenst(cid:228)nde eines forma-
len Begri(cid:27)es und den formalen Begri(cid:27) selbst als Grundbegri(cid:27)e
einf(cid:252)hren. Man kann also z. B. nicht den Begri(cid:27) der Funktion,
und auch spezielle Funktionen (wie Russell) als Grundbegri(cid:27)e
einf(cid:252)hren; oder den Begri(cid:27) der Zahl und bestimmte Zahlen.
4.1273 Wollen wir den allgemeinen Satz: (cid:18)b ist ein Nachfolger von a(cid:16)
in der Begri(cid:27)sschrift ausdr(cid:252)cken, so brauchen wir hierzu einen
Ausdruck f(cid:252)r das allgemeine Glied der Formenreihe: aRb, (∃x) :
aRx.xRb, (∃x,y) : aRx.xRy.yRb, ... Das allgemeine Glied einer
Formenreihe kann man nur durch eine Variable ausdr(cid:252)cken, denn
117

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
der Begri(cid:27): Glied dieser Formenreihe, ist ein formaler Begri(cid:27).
(Dies haben Frege und Russell (cid:252)bersehen; die Art und Weise wie
sie allgemeine S(cid:228)tze, wie den obigen ausdr(cid:252)cken wollen ist daher
falsch; sie enth(cid:228)lt einen circulus vitiosus.)
Wir k(cid:246)nnen das allgemeine Glied der Formenreihe bestim-
men, indem wir ihr erstes Glied angeben und die allgemeine
Form der Operation, welche das folgende Glied aus dem vorher-
gehenden Satz erzeugt.
4.1274 Die Frage nach der Existenz eines formalen Begri(cid:27)es ist unsinnig.
Denn kein Satz kann eine solche Frage beantworten.
(Man kann also z. B. nicht fragen: (cid:18)Gibt es unanalysierbare
Subjekt-Pr(cid:228)dikats(cid:228)tze?(cid:16))
4.128 Die logischen Formen sind zahllos.
Darum gibt es in der Logik keine ausgezeichneten Zahlen und
darum gibt es keinen philosophischen Monismus oder Dualismus,
etc.
4.2 Der Sinn des Satzes ist seine (cid:220)bereinstimmung, und Nicht(cid:252)ber-
einstimmung mit den M(cid:246)glichkeiten des Bestehens und Nicht-
bestehens der Sachverhalte.
4.21 Der einfachste Satz, der Elementarsatz, behauptet das Bestehen
eines Sachverhaltes.
4.211 Ein Zeichen des Elementarsatzes ist es, dass kein Elementarsatz
mit ihm in Widerspruch stehen kann.
4.22 Der Elementarsatz besteht aus Namen. Er ist ein Zusammen-
hang, eine Verkettung, von Namen.
4.221 Es ist o(cid:27)enbar, dass wir bei der Analyse der S(cid:228)tze auf Elemen-
tars(cid:228)tze kommen m(cid:252)ssen, die aus Namen in unmittelbarer Ver-
bindung bestehen.
Es fr(cid:228)gt sich hier, wie kommt der Satzverband zustande.
4.2211 Auch wenn die Welt unendlich komplex ist, so dass jede Tatsache
aus unendlich vielen Sachverhalten besteht und jeder Sachver-
halt aus unendlich vielen Gegenst(cid:228)nden zusammengesetzt ist,
auch dann m(cid:252)sste es Gegenst(cid:228)nde und Sachverhalte geben.
4.23 Der Name kommt im Satz nur im Zusammenhange des Elemen-
tarsatzes vor.
118

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
4.24 Die Namen sind die einfachen Symbole, ich deute sie durch ein-
zelne Buchstaben ((cid:18)x(cid:16), (cid:18)y(cid:16), (cid:18)z(cid:16)) an.
Den Elementarsatz schreibe ich als Funktion der Namen in
der Form: (cid:18)fx(cid:16), (cid:18)ϕ(x,y)(cid:16), etc.
Oder ich deute ihn durch die Buchstaben p, q, r an.
4.241 Gebrauche ich zwei Zeichen in ein und derselben Bedeutung, so
dr(cid:252)cke ich dies aus, indem ich zwischen beide das Zeichen (cid:18)=(cid:16)
setze.
(cid:18)a = b(cid:16) heisst also: das Zeichen (cid:18)a(cid:16) ist durch das Zeichen (cid:18)b(cid:16)
ersetzbar.
(F(cid:252)hre ich durch eine Gleichung ein neues Zeichen (cid:18)b(cid:16) ein,
indem ich bestimme, es solle ein bereits bekanntes Zeichen (cid:18)a(cid:16) er-
setzen, so schreibe ich die Gleichung(cid:22)De(cid:28)nition(cid:22)(wie Russell)
in der Form (cid:18)a = b Def.(cid:16). Die De(cid:28)nition ist eine Zeichenregel.)
4.242 Ausdr(cid:252)cke von der Form (cid:18)a = b(cid:16) sind also nur Behelfe der Dar-
stellung; sie sagen nichts (cid:252)ber die Bedeutung der Zeichen (cid:18)a(cid:16),
(cid:18)b(cid:16) aus.
4.243 K(cid:246)nnen wir zwei Namen verstehen, ohne zu wissen, ob sie das-
selbe Ding oder zwei verschiedene Dinge bezeichnen?(cid:22)K(cid:246)nnen
wir einen Satz, worin zwei Namen vorkommen, verstehen, ohne
zu wissen, ob sie Dasselbe oder Verschiedenes bedeuten?
Kenne ich etwa die Bedeutung eines englischen und eines
gleichbedeutenden deutschen Wortes, so ist es unm(cid:246)glich, dass
ich nicht weiss, dass die beiden gleichbedeutend sind; es ist un-
m(cid:246)glich, dass ich sie nicht ineinander (cid:252)bersetzen kann.
Ausdr(cid:252)cke wie (cid:18)a = a(cid:16), oder von diesen abgeleitete, sind
weder Elementars(cid:228)tze, noch sonst sinnvolle Zeichen. (Dies wird
sich sp(cid:228)ter zeigen.)
4.25 Ist der Elementarsatz wahr, so besteht der Sachverhalt; ist der
Elementarsatz falsch, so besteht der Sachverhalt nicht.
4.26 Die Angabe aller wahren Elementars(cid:228)tze beschreibt die Welt
vollst(cid:228)ndig. Die Welt ist vollst(cid:228)ndig beschrieben durch die An-
gaben aller Elementars(cid:228)tze plus der Angabe, welche von ihnen
wahr und welche falsch sind.
4.27 Bez(cid:252)glich des Bestehens und Nichtbestehens von n Sachverhal-
n
ten gibt es K =
(cid:80) (cid:0)n(cid:1)
M(cid:246)glichkeiten.
n ν
ν=0
119

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Es k(cid:246)nnen alle Kombinationen der Sachverhalte bestehen,
die andern nicht bestehen.
4.28 Diesen Kombinationen entsprechen ebenso viele M(cid:246)glichkeiten
der Wahrheit(cid:22)und Falschheit(cid:22)von n Elementars(cid:228)tzen.
4.3 Die Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten der Elementars(cid:228)tze bedeuten die
M(cid:246)glichkeiten des Bestehens und Nichtbestehens der Sachver-
halte.
4.31 Die Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten k(cid:246)nnen wir durch Schemata folgen-
der Art darstellen ((cid:18)W(cid:16) bedeutet (cid:18)wahr(cid:16), (cid:18)F(cid:16), (cid:18)falsch(cid:16). Die Rei-
hen der (cid:18)W(cid:16) und (cid:18)F(cid:16) unter der Reihe der Elementars(cid:228)tze bedeu-
ten in leichtverst(cid:228)ndlicher Symbolik deren Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkei-
ten):
p q r p q p
W W W W W W
F W W F W F
W F W W F
W W F F F
F F W
F W F
W F F
F F F
4.4 Der Satz ist der Ausdruck der (cid:220)bereinstimmung und Nicht(cid:252)ber-
einstimmung mit den Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten der Elementars(cid:228)t-
ze.
4.41 Die Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten der Elementars(cid:228)tze sind die Bedin-
gungen der Wahrheit und Falschheit der S(cid:228)tze.
4.411 Es ist von vornherein wahrscheinlich, dass die Einf(cid:252)hrung der
Elementars(cid:228)tze f(cid:252)r das Verst(cid:228)ndnis aller anderen Satzarten
grundlegend ist. Ja, das Verst(cid:228)ndnis der allgemeinen S(cid:228)tze
h(cid:228)ngt f(cid:252)hlbar von dem der Elementars(cid:228)tze ab.
4.42 Bez(cid:252)glich der (cid:220)bereinstimmung und Nicht(cid:252)bereinstimmung ei-
nes Satzes mit den Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten von n Elementars(cid:228)t-
zen gibt es
(cid:80)
Kn
(cid:0)Kn (cid:1)
= L M(cid:246)glichkeiten.
κ n
κ=0
120

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
4.43 Die (cid:220)bereinstimmung mit den Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten k(cid:246)nnen
wir dadurch ausdr(cid:252)cken, indem wir ihnen im Schema etwa das
Abzeichen (cid:18)W(cid:16) (wahr) zuordnen.
Das Fehlen dieses Abzeichens bedeutet die Nicht(cid:252)bereinstim-
mung.
4.431 Der Ausdruck der (cid:220)bereinstimmung und Nicht(cid:252)bereinstimmung
mit den Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten der Elementars(cid:228)tze dr(cid:252)ckt die
Wahrheitsbedingungen des Satzes aus.
Der Satz ist der Ausdruck seiner Wahrheitsbedingungen.
(Frege hat sie daher ganz richtig als Erkl(cid:228)rung der Zeichen
seiner Begri(cid:27)sschrift vorausgeschickt. Nur ist die Erkl(cid:228)rung des
Wahrheitsbegri(cid:27)es bei Frege falsch: W(cid:228)ren (cid:18)das Wahre(cid:16) und
(cid:18)das Falsche(cid:16) wirklich Gegenst(cid:228)nde und die Argumente in
∼p
etc. dann w(cid:228)re nach Frege’s Bestimmung der Sinn von (cid:18)
∼p(cid:16)
kei-
neswegs bestimmt.)
4.44 Das Zeichen, welches durch die Zuordnung jener Abzeichen (cid:18)W(cid:16)
und der Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten entsteht, ist ein Satzzeichen.
4.441 Es ist klar, dass dem Komplex der Zeichen (cid:18)F(cid:16) und (cid:18)W(cid:16) kein
Gegenstand (oder Komplex von Gegenst(cid:228)nden) entspricht; so
wenig, wie den horizontalen und vertikalen Strichen oder den
Klammern.(cid:22)(cid:18)Logische Gegenst(cid:228)nde(cid:16) gibt es nicht.
Analoges gilt nat(cid:252)rlich f(cid:252)r alle Zeichen, die dasselbe aus-
dr(cid:252)cken wie die Schemata der (cid:18)W(cid:16) und (cid:18)F(cid:16).
4.442 Es ist z. B.:
p q (cid:16)
W W W
F W W
W F
(cid:18) F F W
ein Satzzeichen.
(Frege’s (cid:18)Urteilsstrich(cid:16) (cid:18)⊢(cid:16) ist logisch ganz bedeutungslos;
er zeigt bei Frege (und Russell) nur an, dass diese Autoren die
so bezeichneten S(cid:228)tze f(cid:252)r wahr halten. (cid:18)⊢(cid:16) geh(cid:246)rt daher ebenso
wenig zum Satzgef(cid:252)ge, wie etwa die Nummer des Satzes. Ein
Satz kann unm(cid:246)glich von sich selbst aussagen, dass er wahr ist.)
Ist die Reihenfolge der Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten im Schema
121

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
durch eine Kombinationsregel ein f(cid:252)r allemal festgesetzt, dann
ist die letzte Kolonne allein schon ein Ausdruck der Wahrheits-
bedingungen. Schreiben wir diese Kolonne als Reihe hin, so wird
das Satzzeichen zu:
(cid:18)(WW(cid:21)W)(p, q)(cid:16) oder deutlicher (cid:18)(WWFW)(p, q)(cid:16).
(Die Anzahl der Stellen in der linken Klammer ist durch die
Anzahl der Glieder in der rechten bestimmt.)
4.45 F(cid:252)r n Elementars(cid:228)tze gibt es L m(cid:246)gliche Gruppen von Wahr-
n
heitsbedingungen.
Die Gruppen von Wahrheitsbedingungen, welche zu den
Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten einer Anzahl von Elementars(cid:228)tzen ge-
h(cid:246)ren, lassen sich in eine Reihe ordnen.
4.46 Unter den m(cid:246)glichen Gruppen von Wahrheitsbedingungen gibt
es zwei extreme F(cid:228)lle.
In dem einen Fall ist der Satz f(cid:252)r s(cid:228)mtliche Wahrheitsm(cid:246)g-
lichkeiten der Elementars(cid:228)tze wahr. Wir sagen, die Wahrheits-
bedingungen sind tautologisch.
Im zweiten Fall ist der Satz f(cid:252)r s(cid:228)mtliche Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glich-
keiten falsch: Die Wahrheitsbedingungen sind kontradikto-
risch.
Im ersten Fall nennen wir den Satz eine Tautologie, im zwei-
ten Fall eine Kontradiktion.
4.461 Der Satz zeigt was er sagt, die Tautologie und die Kontradiktion,
dass sie nichts sagen.
Die Tautologie hat keine Wahrheitsbedingungen, denn sie
ist bedingungslos wahr; und die Kontradiktion ist unter keiner
Bedingung wahr.
Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind sinnlos.
(Wie der Punkt von dem zwei Pfeile in entgegengesetzter
Richtung auseinandergehen.)
(Ich weiss z. B. nichts (cid:252)ber das Wetter, wenn ich weiss, dass
es regnet oder nicht regnet.)
4.4611 Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind aber nicht unsinnig; sie geh(cid:246)-
ren zum Symbolismus, und zwar (cid:228)hnlich wie die (cid:18)0(cid:16) zum Sym-
bolismus der Arithmetik.
122

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
4.462 Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind nicht Bilder der Wirklichkeit.
Sie stellen keine m(cid:246)gliche Sachlage dar. Denn jene l(cid:228)sst jede
m(cid:246)gliche Sachlage zu, diese keine.
In der Tautologie heben die Bedingungen der (cid:220)bereinstim-
mung mit der Welt(cid:22)die darstellenden Beziehungen(cid:22)einander
auf, so dass sie in keiner darstellenden Beziehung zur Wirklich-
keit steht.
4.463 Die Wahrheitsbedingungen bestimmen den Spielraum, der den
Tatsachen durch den Satz gelassen wird.
(Der Satz, das Bild, das Modell, sind im negativen Sinne
wie ein fester K(cid:246)rper, der die Bewegungsfreiheit der anderen
beschr(cid:228)nkt; im positiven Sinne, wie der von fester Substanz be-
grenzte Raum, worin ein K(cid:246)rper Platz hat.)
Die Tautologie l(cid:228)sst der Wirklichkeit den ganzen(cid:22)unend-
lichen(cid:22)logischen Raum; die Kontradiktion erf(cid:252)llt den ganzen
logischen Raum und l(cid:228)sst der Wirklichkeit keinen Punkt. Keine
von beiden kann daher die Wirklichkeit irgendwie bestimmen.
4.464 Die Wahrheit der Tautologie ist gewiss, des Satzes m(cid:246)glich, der
Kontradiktion unm(cid:246)glich.
(Gewiss, m(cid:246)glich, unm(cid:246)glich: Hier haben wir das Anzeichen
jener Gradation, die wir in der Wahrscheinlichkeitslehre brau-
chen.)
4.465 Das logische Produkt einer Tautologie und eines Satzes sagt das-
selbe, wie der Satz. Also ist jenes Produkt identisch mit dem
Satz. Denn man kann das Wesentliche des Symbols nicht (cid:228)n-
dern, ohne seinen Sinn zu (cid:228)ndern.
4.466 Einer bestimmten logischen Verbindung von Zeichen entspricht
eine bestimmte logische Verbindung ihrer Bedeutungen; jede
b eliebige Verbindung entspricht nur den unverbundenen Zei-
chen.
Das heisst, S(cid:228)tze die f(cid:252)r jede Sachlage wahr sind, k(cid:246)nnen
(cid:252)berhaupt keine Zeichenverbindungen sein, denn sonst k(cid:246)nnten
ihnen nur bestimmte Verbindungen von Gegenst(cid:228)nden entspre-
chen.
(Und keiner logischen Verbindung entspricht keine Verbin-
dung der Gegenst(cid:228)nde.)
123

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind die Grenzf(cid:228)lle der Zei-
chenverbindung, n(cid:228)mlich ihre Au(cid:29)(cid:246)sung.
4.4661 Freilich sind auch in der Tautologie und Kontradiktion die Zei-
chen noch mit einander verbunden, d. h. sie stehen in Bezie-
hungen zu einander, aber diese Beziehungen sind bedeutungslos,
dem Symb ol unwesentlich.
4.5 Nun scheint es m(cid:246)glich zu sein, die allgemeinste Satzform anzu-
geben: das heisst, eine Beschreibung der S(cid:228)tze irgend einer
Zeichensprache zu geben, so dass jeder m(cid:246)gliche Sinn durch ein
Symbol, auf welches die Beschreibung passt, ausgedr(cid:252)ckt wer-
den kann, und dass jedes Symbol, worauf die Beschreibung passt,
einen Sinn ausdr(cid:252)cken kann, wenn die Bedeutungen der Namen
entsprechend gew(cid:228)hlt werden.
Es ist klar, dass bei der Beschreibung der allgemeinsten Satz-
form nur ihr Wesentliches beschrieben werden darf,(cid:22)sonst w(cid:228)re
sie n(cid:228)mlich nicht die allgemeinste.
Dass es eine allgemeine Satzform gibt, wird dadurch bewie-
sen, dass es keinen Satz geben darf, dessen Form man nicht
h(cid:228)tte voraussehen (d. h. konstruieren) k(cid:246)nnen. Die allgemeine
Form des Satzes ist: Es verh(cid:228)lt sich so und so.
4.51 Angenommen, mir w(cid:228)ren alle Elementars(cid:228)tze gegeben: Dann
l(cid:228)sst sich einfach fragen: welche S(cid:228)tze kann ich aus ihnen bilden.
Und das sind alle S(cid:228)tze und so sind sie begrenzt.
4.52 Die S(cid:228)tze sind Alles, was aus der Gesamtheit aller Elementar-
s(cid:228)tze folgt (nat(cid:252)rlich auch daraus, dass es die Gesamtheit
aller ist). (So k(cid:246)nnte man in gewissem Sinne sagen, dass alle
S(cid:228)tze Verallgemeinerungen der Elementars(cid:228)tze sind.)
4.53 Die allgemeine Satzform ist eine Variable.
5 Der Satz ist eine Wahrheitsfunktion der Elementars(cid:228)tze.
(Der Elementarsatz ist eine Wahrheitsfunktion seiner selbst.)
5.01 Die Elementars(cid:228)tze sind die Wahrheitsargumente des Satzes.
5.02 Es liegt nahe, die Argumente von Funktionen mit den Indices
von Namen zu verwechseln. Ich erkenne n(cid:228)mlich sowohl am Ar-
gument wie am Index die Bedeutung des sie enthaltenden Zei-
chens.
124

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
In Russell’s (cid:18)+ (cid:16) ist z. B. (cid:18)c(cid:16) ein Index, der darauf hinweist,
c
dass das ganze Zeichen das Additionszeichen f(cid:252)r Kardinalzahlen
ist. Aber diese Bezeichnung beruht auf willk(cid:252)rlicher (cid:220)berein-
kunft und man k(cid:246)nnte statt (cid:18)+ (cid:16) auch ein einfaches Zeichen
c
w(cid:228)hlen; in (cid:18) ∼p(cid:16) aber ist (cid:18)p(cid:16) kein Index, sondern ein Argument:
der Sinn von (cid:18)
∼p(cid:16)
kann nicht verstanden werden, ohne dass
vorher der Sinn von (cid:18)p(cid:16) verstanden worden w(cid:228)re. (Im Namen
Julius C(cid:228)sar ist (cid:18)Julius(cid:16) ein Index. Der Index ist immer ein Teil
einer Beschreibung des Gegenstandes, dessen Namen wir ihn an-
h(cid:228)ngen. Z. B. Der C(cid:228)sar aus dem Geschlechte der Julier.)
Die Verwechslung von Argument und Index liegt, wenn ich
mich nicht irre, der Theorie Frege’s von der Bedeutung der S(cid:228)tze
und Funktionen zugrunde. F(cid:252)r Frege waren die S(cid:228)tze der Logik
Namen, und deren Argumente die Indices dieser Namen.
5.1 Die Wahrheitsfunktionen lassen sich in Reihen ordnen.
Das ist die Grundlage der Wahrscheinlichkeitslehre.
5.101 Die Wahrheitsfunktionen jeder Anzahl von Elementars(cid:228)tzen las-
sen sich in einem Schema folgender Art hinschreiben:
(WWWW)(p,q) Tautologie (Wenn p, so p; und wenn q, so q.) (p ⊃ p . q ⊃ q)
( F WWW)(p,q) in Worten: Nicht beides p und q. (∼(p . q))
(W F WW)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) Wenn q, so p. (q ⊃ p)
(WW F W)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) Wenn p, so q. (p ⊃ q)
(WWW F )(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) p oder q. (p ∨ q)
( F F WW)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) Nicht q. (∼q)
( F W F W)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) Nicht p. (∼p)
( F WW F )(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) p, oder q, aber nicht beide. (p . ∼q : ∨ : q . ∼p)
(W F F W)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) Wenn p, so q; und wenn q, so p. (p ≡ q)
(W F W F )(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) p
(WW F F )(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) q
( F F F W)(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) Weder p noch q. (∼p . ∼q) oder (p | q)
( F F W F )(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) p und nicht q. (p . ∼q)
( F W F F )(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) q und nicht p. (q . ∼p)
(W F F F )(p,q) (cid:18) (cid:18) q und p. (q . p)
( F F F F )(p,q) Kontradiktion (p und nicht p; und q und nicht q.) (p . ∼p . q . ∼q)
Diejenigen Wahrheitsm(cid:246)glichkeiten seiner Wahrheitsargu-
mente, welche den Satz bewahrheiten, will ich seine Wahr-
heitsgr(cid:252)nde nennen.
5.11 Sind die Wahrheitsgr(cid:252)nde, die einer Anzahl von S(cid:228)tzen gemein-
sam sind, s(cid:228)mtlich auch Wahrheitsgr(cid:252)nde eines bestimmten Sat-
125

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
zes, so sagen wir, die Wahrheit dieses Satzes folge aus der Wahr-
heit jener S(cid:228)tze.
5.12 Insbesondere folgt die Wahrheit eines Satzes (cid:18)p(cid:16) aus der Wahr-
heit eines anderen (cid:18)q(cid:16), wenn alle Wahrheitsgr(cid:252)nde des zweiten
Wahrheitsgr(cid:252)nde des ersten sind.
5.121 Die Wahrheitsgr(cid:252)nde des einen sind in denen des anderen ent-
halten; p folgt aus q.
5.122 Folgt p aus q, so ist der Sinn von (cid:18)p(cid:16) im Sinne von (cid:18)q(cid:16) enthalten.
5.123 Wenn ein Gott eine Welt erscha(cid:27)t, worin gewisse S(cid:228)tze wahr
sind, so scha(cid:27)t er damit auch schon eine Welt, in welcher alle ihre
Folges(cid:228)tze stimmen. Und (cid:228)hnlich k(cid:246)nnte er keine Welt scha(cid:27)en,
worin der Satz (cid:18)p(cid:16) wahr ist, ohne seine s(cid:228)mtlichen Gegenst(cid:228)nde
zu scha(cid:27)en.
5.124 Der Satz bejaht jeden Satz der aus ihm folgt.
5.1241 (cid:18)p . q(cid:16) ist einer der S(cid:228)tze, welche (cid:18)p(cid:16) bejahen und zugleich einer
der S(cid:228)tze, welche (cid:18)q(cid:16) bejahen.
Zwei S(cid:228)tze sind einander entgegengesetzt, wenn es keinen
sinnvollen Satz gibt, der sie beide bejaht.
Jeder Satz der einem anderen widerspricht, verneint ihn.
5.13 Dass die Wahrheit eines Satzes aus der Wahrheit anderer S(cid:228)tze
folgt, ersehen wir aus der Struktur der S(cid:228)tze.
5.131 Folgt die Wahrheit eines Satzes aus der Wahrheit anderer, so
dr(cid:252)ckt sich dies durch Beziehungen aus, in welchen die Formen
jener S(cid:228)tze zu einander stehen; und zwar brauchen wir sie nicht
erst in jene Beziehungen zu setzen, indem wir sie in einem Satze
miteinander verbinden, sondern diese Beziehungen sind intern
und bestehen, sobald, und dadurch dass, jene S(cid:228)tze bestehen.
5.1311 Wenn wir von p∨q und ∼p auf q schliessen, so ist hier durch die
Bezeichnungsweise die Beziehung der Satzformen von (cid:18)p∨q(cid:16) und
(cid:18) ∼p(cid:16) verh(cid:252)llt. Schreiben wir aber z. B. statt (cid:18)p∨q(cid:16) (cid:18)p|q .|.p|q(cid:16)
und statt (cid:18) ∼p(cid:16) (cid:18)p|p(cid:16) (p|q = weder p, noch q), so wird der innere
Zusammenhang o(cid:27)enbar.
(Dass man aus (x).fx auf fa schliessen kann, das zeigt, dass
die Allgemeinheit auch im Symbol (cid:18)(x) . fx(cid:16) vorhanden ist.)
126

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
5.132 Folgt p aus q, so kann ich von q auf p schliessen; p aus q folgern.
Die Art des Schlusses ist allein aus den beiden S(cid:228)tzen zu
entnehmen.
Nur sie selbst k(cid:246)nnen den Schluss rechtfertigen.
(cid:18)Schlussgesetze(cid:16), welche(cid:22)wie bei Frege und Russell(cid:22)die
Schl(cid:252)sse rechtfertigen sollen, sind sinnlos, und w(cid:228)ren (cid:252)ber(cid:29)(cid:252)s-
sig.
5.133 Alles Folgern geschieht a priori.
5.134 Aus einem Elementarsatz l(cid:228)sst sich kein anderer folgern.
5.135 Auf keine Weise kann aus dem Bestehen irgend einer Sachlage
auf das Bestehen einer, von ihr g(cid:228)nzlich verschiedenen Sachlage
geschlossen werden.
5.136 Einen Kausalnexus, der einen solchen Schluss rechtfertigte, gibt
es nicht.
5.1361 Die Ereignisse der Zukunft k(cid:246)nnen wir nicht aus den gegen-
w(cid:228)rtigen erschliessen.
Der Glaube an den Kausalnexus ist der Ab erglaub e.
5.1362 Die Willensfreiheit besteht darin, dass zuk(cid:252)nftige Handlungen
jetzt nicht gewusst werden k(cid:246)nnen. Nur dann k(cid:246)nnten wir sie
wissen, wenn die Kausalit(cid:228)t eine innere Notwendigkeit w(cid:228)re,
wie die des logischen Schlusses.(cid:22)Der Zusammenhang von Wis-
sen und Gewusstem, ist der der logischen Notwendigkeit.
((cid:18)A weiss, dass p der Fall ist(cid:16) ist sinnlos, wenn p eine Tauto-
logie ist.)
5.1363 Wenn daraus, dass ein Satz uns einleuchtet, nicht folgt, dass
er wahr ist, so ist das Einleuchten auch keine Rechtfertigung f(cid:252)r
unseren Glauben an seine Wahrheit.
5.14 Folgt ein Satz aus einem anderen, so sagt dieser mehr als jener,
jener weniger als dieser.
5.141 Folgt p aus q und q aus p, so sind sie ein und derselbe Satz.
5.142 Die Tautologie folgt aus allen S(cid:228)tzen: sie sagt Nichts.
5.143 Die Kontradiktion ist das Gemeinsame der S(cid:228)tze, was kein Satz
mit einem anderen gemein hat. Die Tautologie ist das Gemein-
same aller S(cid:228)tze, welche nichts miteinander gemein haben.
127

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Die Kontradiktion verschwindet sozusagen ausserhalb, die
Tautologie innerhalb aller S(cid:228)tze.
Die Kontradiktion ist die (cid:228)ussere Grenze der S(cid:228)tze, die Tau-
tologie ihr substanzloser Mittelpunkt.
5.15 Ist W die Anzahl der Wahrheitsgr(cid:252)nde des Satzes (cid:18)r(cid:16), W die
r rs
Anzahl derjenigen Wahrheitsgr(cid:252)nde des Satzes (cid:18)s(cid:16), die zugleich
Wahrheitsgr(cid:252)nde von (cid:18)r(cid:16) sind, dann nennen wir das Verh(cid:228)ltnis:
W : W das Mass der Wahrscheinlichkeit, welche der
rs r
Satz (cid:18)r(cid:16) dem Satz (cid:18)s(cid:16) gibt.
5.151 Sei in einem Schema wie dem obigen in No. 5.101 W die Anzahl
r
der (cid:18)W(cid:16) im Satze r; W die Anzahl derjenigen (cid:18)W(cid:16) im Satze s,
rs
die in gleichen Kolonnen mit (cid:18)W(cid:16) des Satzes r stehen. Der Satz
r gibt dann dem Satze s die Wahrscheinlichkeit: W : W .
rs r
5.1511 Es gibt keinen besonderen Gegenstand, der den Wahrscheinlich-
keitss(cid:228)tzen eigen w(cid:228)re.
5.152 S(cid:228)tze, welche keine Wahrheitsargumente mit einander gemein
haben, nennen wir von einander unabh(cid:228)ngig.
Von einander unabh(cid:228)ngige S(cid:228)tze (z. B. irgend zwei Elemen-
tars(cid:228)tze) geben einander die Wahrscheinlichkeit 1.
2
Folgt p aus q, so gibt der Satz (cid:18)q(cid:16) dem Satz (cid:18)p(cid:16) die Wahr-
scheinlichkeit 1. Die Gewissheit des logischen Schlusses ist ein
Grenzfall der Wahrscheinlichkeit.
(Anwendung auf Tautologie und Kontradiktion.)
5.153 Ein Satz ist an sich weder wahrscheinlich noch unwahrscheinlich.
Ein Ereignis tri(cid:27)t ein, oder es tri(cid:27)t nicht ein, ein Mittelding gibt
es nicht.
5.154 In einer Urne seien gleichviel weisse und schwarze Kugeln (und
keine anderen). Ich ziehe eine Kugel nach der anderen und lege
sie wieder in die Urne zur(cid:252)ck. Dann kann ich durch den Versuch
feststellen, dass sich die Zahlen der gezogenen schwarzen und
weissen Kugeln bei fortgesetztem Ziehen einander n(cid:228)hern.
Das ist also kein mathematisches Faktum.
Wenn ich nun sage: Es ist gleich wahrscheinlich, dass ich ei-
ne weisse Kugel wie eine schwarze ziehen werde, so heisst das:
Alle mir bekannten Umst(cid:228)nde (die hypothetisch angenommenen
Naturgesetze mitinbegri(cid:27)en) geben dem Eintre(cid:27)en des einen Er-
128

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
eignisses nicht mehr Wahrscheinlichkeit als dem Eintre(cid:27)en des
anderen. Das heisst, sie geben(cid:22)wie aus den obigen Erkl(cid:228)rungen
leicht zu entnehmen ist(cid:22)jedem die Wahrscheinlichkeit 1.
2
Was ich durch den Versuch best(cid:228)tige ist, dass das Eintre(cid:27)en
der beiden Ereignisse von den Umst(cid:228)nden, die ich nicht n(cid:228)her
kenne, unabh(cid:228)ngig ist.
5.155 Die Einheit des Wahrscheinlichkeitssatzes ist: Die Umst(cid:228)nde(cid:22)
die ich sonst nicht weiter kenne(cid:22)geben dem Eintre(cid:27)en eines
bestimmten Ereignisses den und den Grad der Wahrscheinlich-
keit.
5.156 So ist die Wahrscheinlichkeit eine Verallgemeinerung.
Sie involviert eine allgemeine Beschreibung einer Satzform.
Nur in Ermanglung der Gewissheit gebrauchen wir die Wahr-
scheinlichkeit.(cid:22)Wenn wir zwar eine Tatsache nicht vollkommen
kennen, wohl aber etwas (cid:252)ber ihre Form wissen.
(Ein Satz kann zwar ein unvollst(cid:228)ndiges Bild einer gewissen
Sachlage sein, aber er ist immer ein vollst(cid:228)ndiges Bild.)
Der Wahrscheinlichkeitssatz ist gleichsam ein Auszug aus an-
deren S(cid:228)tzen.
5.2 Die Strukturen der S(cid:228)tze stehen in internen Beziehungen zu ein-
ander.
5.21 Wir k(cid:246)nnen diese internen Beziehungen dadurch in unserer Aus-
drucksweise hervorheben, dass wir einen Satz als Resultat einer
Operation darstellen, die ihn aus anderen S(cid:228)tzen (den Basen der
Operation) hervorbringt.
5.22 Die Operation ist der Ausdruck einer Beziehung zwischen den
Strukturen ihres Resultats und ihrer Basen.
5.23 Die Operation ist das, was mit dem einen Satz geschehen muss,
um aus ihm den anderen zu machen.
5.231 Und das wird nat(cid:252)rlich von ihren formalen Eigenschaften, von
der internen ˜hnlichkeit ihrer Formen abh(cid:228)ngen.
5.232 Die interne Relation, die eine Reihe ordnet, ist (cid:228)quivalent mit
der Operation, durch welche ein Glied aus dem anderen entsteht.
5.233 Die Operation kann erst dort auftreten, wo ein Satz auf logisch
bedeutungsvolle Weise aus einem anderen entsteht. Also dort,
129

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
wo die logische Konstruktion des Satzes anf(cid:228)ngt.
5.234 Die Wahrheitsfunktionen der Elementars(cid:228)tze sind Resultate von
Operationen, die die Elementars(cid:228)tze als Basen haben. (Ich nenne
diese Operationen Wahrheitsoperationen.)
5.2341 Der Sinn einer Wahrheitsfunktion von p ist eine Funktion des
Sinnes von p.
Verneinung, logische Addition, logische Multiplikation, etc.,
etc. sind Operationen.
(Die Verneinung verkehrt den Sinn des Satzes.)
5.24 Die Operation zeigt sich in einer Variablen; sie zeigt, wie man
von einer Form von S(cid:228)tzen zu einer anderen gelangen kann.
Sie bringt den Unterschied der Formen zum Ausdruck.
(Und das Gemeinsame zwischen den Basen und dem Resultat
der Operation sind eben die Basen.)
5.241 Die Operation kennzeichnet keine Form, sondern nur den Un-
terschied der Formen.
5.242 Dieselbe Operation, die (cid:18)q(cid:16) aus (cid:18)p(cid:16) macht, macht aus (cid:18)q(cid:16) (cid:18)r(cid:16)
u. s. f. Dies kann nur darin ausgedr(cid:252)ckt sein, dass (cid:18)p(cid:16), (cid:18)q(cid:16), (cid:18)r(cid:16),
etc. Variable sind, die gewisse formale Relationen allgemein zum
Ausdruck bringen.
5.25 Das Vorkommen der Operation charakterisiert den Sinn des Sat-
zes nicht.
Die Operation sagt ja nichts aus, nur ihr Resultat, und dies
h(cid:228)ngt von den Basen der Operation ab.
(Operation und Funktion d(cid:252)rfen nicht miteinander verwech-
selt werden.)
5.251 Eine Funktion kann nicht ihr eigenes Argument sein, wohl aber
kann das Resultat einer Operation ihre eigene Basis werden.
5.252 Nur so ist das Fortschreiten von Glied zu Glied in einer Formen-
reihe (von Type zu Type in den Hierarchien Russells und White-
heads) m(cid:246)glich. (Russell und Whitehead haben die M(cid:246)glichkeit
dieses Fortschreitens nicht zugegeben, aber immer wieder von
ihr Gebrauch gemacht.)
5.2521 Die fortgesetzte Anwendung einer Operation auf ihr eigenes Re-
sultat nenne ich ihre successive Anwendung ((cid:18)O′O′O′a(cid:16) ist das
130

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Resultat der dreimaligen successiven Anwendung von (cid:18)O′ξ(cid:16) auf
(cid:18)a(cid:16)).
In einem (cid:228)hnlichen Sinne rede ich von der successiven An-
wendung mehrerer Operationen auf eine Anzahl von S(cid:228)tzen.
5.2522 Das allgemeine Glied einer Formenreihe a, O′a, O′O′a, ....
schreibe ich daher so: (cid:18)[a,x,O′x](cid:16). Dieser Klammerausdruck ist
eine Variable. Das erste Glied des Klammerausdruckes ist der
Anfang der Formenreihe, das zweite die Form eines beliebigen
Gliedes x der Reihe und das dritte die Form desjenigen Gliedes
der Reihe, welches auf x unmittelbar folgt.
5.2523 Der Begri(cid:27) der successiven Anwendung der Operation ist (cid:228)qui-
valent mit dem Begri(cid:27) (cid:18)und so weiter(cid:16).
5.253 Eine Operation kann die Wirkung einer anderen r(cid:252)ckg(cid:228)ngig ma-
chen. Operationen k(cid:246)nnen einander aufheben.
5.254 Die Operation kann verschwinden (z. B. die Verneinung in
(cid:18) ∼∼p(cid:16), ∼∼p = p).
5.3 Alle S(cid:228)tze sind Resultate von Wahrheitsoperationen mit den
Elementars(cid:228)tzen.
Die Wahrheitsoperation ist die Art und Weise, wie aus den
Elementars(cid:228)tzen die Wahrheitsfunktion entsteht.
Nach dem Wesen der Wahrheitsoperation wird auf die glei-
che Weise, wie aus den Elementars(cid:228)tzen ihre Wahrheitsfunktion,
aus Wahrheitsfunktionen eine Neue. Jede Wahrheitsoperation
erzeugt aus Wahrheitsfunktionen von Elementars(cid:228)tzen wieder
eine Wahrheitsfunktion von Elementars(cid:228)tzen, einen Satz. Das
Resultat jeder Wahrheitsoperation mit den Resultaten von
Wahrheitsoperationen mit Elementars(cid:228)tzen ist wieder das
Resultat Einer Wahrheitsoperation mit Elementars(cid:228)tzen.
Jeder Satz ist das Resultat von Wahrheitsoperationen mit
Elementars(cid:228)tzen.
5.31 Die Schemata No. 4.31 haben auch dann eine Bedeutung, wenn
(cid:18)p(cid:16), (cid:18)q(cid:16), (cid:18)r(cid:16), etc. nicht Elementars(cid:228)tze sind.
Und es ist leicht zu sehen, dass das Satzzeichen in No. 4.442,
auch wenn (cid:18)p(cid:16) und (cid:18)q(cid:16) Wahrheitsfunktionen von Elemen-
tars(cid:228)tzen sind, Eine Wahrheitsfunktion von Elementars(cid:228)tzen
ausdr(cid:252)ckt.
131

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
5.32 Alle Wahrheitsfunktionen sind Resultate der successiven An-
wendung einer endlichen Anzahl von Wahrheitsoperationen auf
die Elementars(cid:228)tze.
5.4 Hier zeigt es sich, dass es (cid:18)logische Gegenst(cid:228)nde(cid:16), (cid:18)logische
Konstante(cid:16) (im Sinne Freges und Russells) nicht gibt.
5.41 Denn: Alle Resultate von Wahrheitsoperationen mit Wahrheits-
funktionen sind identisch, welche eine und dieselbe Wahrheits-
funktion von Elementars(cid:228)tzen sind.
5.42 Dass ∨, ⊃, etc. nicht Beziehungen im Sinne von rechts und
links etc. sind, leuchtet ein.
Die M(cid:246)glichkeit des kreuzweisen De(cid:28)nierens der logischen
(cid:18)Urzeichen(cid:16) Freges und Russells zeigt schon, dass dies keine
Urzeichen sind, und schon erst recht, dass sie keine Relationen
bezeichnen.
Und es ist o(cid:27)enbar, dass das (cid:18)⊃(cid:16), welches wir durch (cid:18) ∼ (cid:16)
und (cid:18)∨(cid:16) de(cid:28)nieren, identisch ist mit dem, durch welches wir
(cid:18)∨(cid:16) mit (cid:18) ∼ (cid:16) de(cid:28)nieren und dass dieses (cid:18)∨(cid:16) mit dem ersten
identisch ist. U. s. w.
5.43 Dass aus einer Tatsache p unendlich viele andere folgen soll-
ten, n(cid:228)mlich
∼∼p, ∼∼∼∼p,
etc., ist doch von vornherein kaum
zu glauben. Und nicht weniger merkw(cid:252)rdig ist, dass die unend-
liche Anzahl der S(cid:228)tze der Logik (der Mathematik) aus einem
halben Dutzend (cid:18)Grundgesetzen(cid:16) folgen.
Alle S(cid:228)tze der Logik sagen aber dasselbe. N(cid:228)mlich Nichts.
5.44 Die Wahrheitsfunktionen sind keine materiellen Funktionen.
Wenn man z. B. eine Bejahung durch doppelte Verneinung
erzeugen kann, ist dann die Verneinung(cid:22)in irgend einem Sinn
(cid:22)in der Bejahung enthalten? Verneint (cid:18)
∼∼p(cid:16) ∼p,
oder bejaht
es p; oder beides?
Der Satz (cid:18)
∼∼p(cid:16)
handelt nicht von der Verneinung wie von
einem Gegenstand; wohl aber ist die M(cid:246)glichkeit der Vernei-
nung in der Bejahung bereits pr(cid:228)judiziert.
∼
Und g(cid:228)be es einen Gegenstand, der (cid:18) (cid:16) hiesse, so m(cid:252)sste
(cid:18) ∼∼p(cid:16) etwas anderes sagen als (cid:18)p(cid:16). Denn der eine Satz w(cid:252)rde
∼
dann eben von handeln, der andere nicht.
5.441 Dieses Verschwinden der scheinbaren logischen Konstanten tritt
132

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
auch ein, wenn (cid:18) ∼(∃x).∼fx(cid:16) dasselbe sagt wie (cid:18)(x).fx(cid:16), oder
(cid:18)(∃x) . fx . x = a(cid:16) dasselbe wie (cid:18)fa(cid:16).
5.442 Wenn uns ein Satz gegeben ist, so sind mit ihm auch schon
die Resultate aller Wahrheitsoperationen, die ihn zur Basis ha-
ben, gegeben.
5.45 Gibt es logische Urzeichen, so muss eine richtige Logik ihre
Stellung zueinander klar machen und ihr Dasein rechtfertigen.
Der Bau der Logik aus ihren Urzeichen muss klar werden.
5.451 Hat die Logik Grundbegri(cid:27)e, so m(cid:252)ssen sie von einander un-
abh(cid:228)ngig sein. Ist ein Grundbegri(cid:27) eingef(cid:252)hrt, so muss er in
allen Verbindungen eingef(cid:252)hrt sein, worin er (cid:252)berhaupt vor-
kommt. Man kann ihn also nicht zuerst f(cid:252)r eine Verbindung,
dann noch einmal f(cid:252)r eine andere einf(cid:252)hren. Z. B.: Ist die Ver-
neinung eingef(cid:252)hrt, so m(cid:252)ssen wir sie jetzt in S(cid:228)tzen von der
Form (cid:18) ∼p(cid:16) ebenso verstehen, wie in S(cid:228)tzen wie (cid:18) ∼(p ∨ q)(cid:16),
(cid:18)(∃x) . ∼fx(cid:16) u. a. Wir d(cid:252)rfen sie nicht erst f(cid:252)r die eine Klas-
se von F(cid:228)llen, dann f(cid:252)r die andere einf(cid:252)hren, denn es bliebe
dann zweifelhaft, ob ihre Bedeutung in beiden F(cid:228)llen die glei-
che w(cid:228)re und es w(cid:228)re kein Grund vorhanden, in beiden F(cid:228)llen
dieselbe Art der Zeichenverbindung zu ben(cid:252)tzen.
(Kurz, f(cid:252)r die Einf(cid:252)hrung der Urzeichen gilt, mutatis mu-
tandis, dasselbe, was Frege ((cid:18)Grundgesetze der Arithmetik(cid:16))
f(cid:252)r die Einf(cid:252)hrung von Zeichen durch De(cid:28)nitionen gesagt hat.)
5.452 Die Einf(cid:252)hrung eines neuen Behelfes in den Symbolismus der
Logik muss immer ein folgenschweres Ereignis sein. Kein neu-
er Behelf darf in die Logik(cid:22)sozusagen, mit ganz unschuldiger
Miene(cid:22)in Klammern oder unter dem Striche eingef(cid:252)hrt wer-
den.
(So kommen in den (cid:18)Principia Mathematica(cid:16) von Russell
und Whitehead De(cid:28)nitionen und Grundgesetze in Worten vor.
Warum hier pl(cid:246)tzlich Worte? Dies bed(cid:252)rfte einer Rechtferti-
gung. Sie fehlt und muss fehlen, da das Vorgehen tats(cid:228)chlich
unerlaubt ist.)
Hat sich aber die Einf(cid:252)hrung eines neuen Behelfes an einer
Stelle als n(cid:246)tig erwiesen, so muss man sich nun sofort fragen:
Wo muss dieser Behelf nun immer angewandt werden? Seine
Stellung in der Logik muss nun erkl(cid:228)rt werden.
133

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
5.453 Alle Zahlen der Logik m(cid:252)ssen sich rechtfertigen lassen.
Oder vielmehr: Es muss sich herausstellen, dass es in der
Logik keine Zahlen gibt.
Es gibt keine ausgezeichneten Zahlen.
5.454 In der Logik gibt es kein Nebeneinander, kann es keine Klassi-
(cid:28)kation geben.
In der Logik kann es nicht Allgemeineres und Spezielleres
geben.
5.4541 Die L(cid:246)sungen der logischen Probleme m(cid:252)ssen einfach sein,
denn sie setzen den Standard der Einfachheit.
Die Menschen haben immer geahnt, dass es ein Gebiet von
Fragen geben m(cid:252)sse, deren Antworten(cid:22)a priori(cid:22)symmetrisch,
und zu einem abgeschlossenen, regelm(cid:228)ssigen Gebilde vereint-
liegen.
Ein Gebiet, in dem der Satz gilt: simplex sigillum veri.
5.46 Wenn man die logischen Zeichen richtig einf(cid:252)hrte, so h(cid:228)tte
man damit auch schon den Sinn aller ihrer Kombinationen
eingef(cid:252)hrt; also nicht nur (cid:18)p ∨ q(cid:16) sondern auch schon (cid:18) ∼(p ∨
∼q)(cid:16)
etc. etc. Man h(cid:228)tte damit auch schon die Wirkung aller
nur m(cid:246)glichen Kombinationen von Klammern eingef(cid:252)hrt. Und
damit w(cid:228)re es klar geworden, dass die eigentlichen allgemeinen
Urzeichen nicht die (cid:18)p ∨ q(cid:16), (cid:18)(∃x) . fx(cid:16), etc. sind, sondern die
allgemeinste Form ihrer Kombinationen.
5.461 Bedeutungsvoll ist die scheinbar unwichtige Tatsache, dass die
logischen Scheinbeziehungen, wie ∨ und ⊃, der Klammern be-
d(cid:252)rfen(cid:22)im Gegensatz zu den wirklichen Beziehungen.
Die Ben(cid:252)tzung der Klammern mit jenen scheinbaren Urzei-
chen deutet ja schon darauf hin, dass diese nicht die wirklichen
Urzeichen sind. Und es wird doch wohl niemand glauben, dass
die Klammern eine selbst(cid:228)ndige Bedeutung haben.
5.4611 Die logischen Operationszeichen sind Interpunktionen.
5.47 Es ist klar, dass alles was sich (cid:252)berhaupt von vornherein
(cid:252)ber die Form aller S(cid:228)tze sagen l(cid:228)sst, sich aufeinmal sagen
lassen muss.
Sind ja schon im Elementarsatze alle logischen Operationen
enthalten. Denn (cid:18)fa(cid:16) sagt dasselbe wie (cid:18)(∃x) . fx . x = a(cid:16).
134

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Wo Zusammengesetztheit ist, da ist Argument und Funkti-
on, und wo diese sind, sind bereits alle logischen Konstanten.
Man k(cid:246)nnte sagen: Die Eine logische Konstante ist das, was
alle S(cid:228)tze, ihrer Natur nach, mit einander gemein haben.
Das aber ist die allgemeine Satzform.
5.471 Die allgemeine Satzform ist das Wesen des Satzes.
5.4711 Das Wesen des Satzes angeben, heisst, das Wesen aller Be-
schreibung angeben, also das Wesen der Welt.
5.472 Die Beschreibung der allgemeinsten Satzform ist die Beschrei-
bung des einen und einzigen allgemeinen Urzeichens der Logik.
5.473 Die Logik muss f(cid:252)r sich selber sorgen.
Ein m(cid:246)gliches Zeichen muss auch bezeichnen k(cid:246)nnen. Al-
les was in der Logik m(cid:246)glich ist, ist auch erlaubt. ((cid:18)Sokrates ist
identisch(cid:16) heisst darum nichts, weil es keine Eigenschaft gibt,
die (cid:18)identisch(cid:16) heisst. Der Satz ist unsinnig, weil wir eine will-
k(cid:252)rliche Bestimmung nicht getro(cid:27)en haben, aber nicht darum,
weil das Symbol an und f(cid:252)r sich unerlaubt w(cid:228)re.)
Wir k(cid:246)nnen uns, in gewissem Sinne, nicht in der Logik
irren.
5.4731 Das Einleuchten, von dem Russell so viel sprach, kann nur da-
durch in der Logik entbehrlich werden, dass die Sprache selbst
jeden logischen Fehler verhindert.(cid:22)Dass die Logik a priori ist,
besteht darin, dass nicht unlogisch gedacht werden kann.
5.4732 Wir k(cid:246)nnen einem Zeichen nicht den unrechten Sinn geben.
5.47321 Occams Devise ist nat(cid:252)rlich keine willk(cid:252)rliche, oder durch ih-
ren praktischen Erfolg gerechtfertigte, Regel: Sie besagt, dass
unn(cid:246)tige Zeicheneinheiten nichts bedeuten.
Zeichen, die Einen Zweck erf(cid:252)llen, sind logisch (cid:228)quivalent,
Zeichen, die keinen Zweck erf(cid:252)llen, logisch bedeutungslos.
5.4733 Frege sagt: Jeder rechtm(cid:228)ssig gebildete Satz muss einen Sinn
haben; und ich sage: Jeder m(cid:246)gliche Satz ist rechtm(cid:228)ssig ge-
bildet, und wenn er keinen Sinn hat, so kann das nur daran
liegen, dass wir einigen seiner Bestandteile keine Bedeutung
gegeben haben.
(Wenn wir auch glauben, es getan zu haben.)
135

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
So sagt (cid:18)Sokrates ist identisch(cid:16) darum nichts, weil wir dem
Wort (cid:18)identisch(cid:16) als Eigenschaftswort keine Bedeutung
gegeben haben. Denn, wenn es als Gleichheitszeichen auftritt,
so symbolisiert es auf ganz andere Art und Weise(cid:22)die bezeich-
nende Beziehung ist eine andere,(cid:22)also ist auch das Symbol in
beiden F(cid:228)llen ganz verschieden; die beiden Symbole haben nur
das Zeichen zuf(cid:228)llig miteinander gemein.
5.474 Die Anzahl der n(cid:246)tigen Grundoperationen h(cid:228)ngt nur von un-
serer Notation ab.
5.475 Es kommt nur darauf an, ein Zeichensystem von einer be-
stimmten Anzahl von Dimensionen(cid:22)von einer bestimmten ma-
thematischen Mannigfaltigkeit(cid:22)zu bilden.
5.476 Es ist klar, dass es sich hier nicht um eine Anzahl von
Grundb egriffen handelt, die bezeichnet werden m(cid:252)ssen,
sondern um den Ausdruck einer Regel.
5.5 Jede Wahrheitsfunktion ist ein Resultat der successiven An-
wendung der Operation ((cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21)W)(ξ,....) auf Elementars(cid:228)t-
ze.
Diese Operation verneint s(cid:228)mtliche S(cid:228)tze in der rechten
Klammer und ich nenne sie die Negation dieser S(cid:228)tze.
5.501 Einen Klammerausdruck, dessen Glieder S(cid:228)tze sind, deute ich
(cid:22)wenn die Reihenfolge der Glieder in der Klammer gleich-
g(cid:252)ltig ist(cid:22)durch ein Zeichen von der Form (cid:18)(ξ)(cid:16) an. (cid:18)ξ(cid:16) ist
eine Variable, deren Werte die Glieder des Klammerausdruckes
sind; und der Strich (cid:252)ber der Variablen deutet an, dass sie ihre
s(cid:228)mtlichen Werte in der Klammer vertritt.
(Hat also ξ etwa die 3 Werte P, Q, R, so ist (ξ) = (P, Q,
R).)
Die Werte der Variablen werden festgesetzt.
Die Festsetzung ist die Beschreibung der S(cid:228)tze, welche die
Variable vertritt.
Wie die Beschreibung der Glieder des Klammerausdruckes
geschieht, ist unwesentlich.
Wir k(cid:246)nnen drei Arten der Beschreibung unterscheiden:
1. Die direkte Aufz(cid:228)hlung. In diesem Fall k(cid:246)nnen wir statt der
Variablen einfach ihre konstanten Werte setzen. 2. Die Angabe
136

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
einer Funktion fx, deren Werte f(cid:252)r alle Werte von x die zu
beschreibenden S(cid:228)tze sind. 3. Die Angabe eines formalen Ge-
setzes, nach welchem jene S(cid:228)tze gebildet sind. In diesem Falle
sind die Glieder des Klammerausdrucks s(cid:228)mtliche Glieder einer
Formenreihe.
5.502 Ich schreibe also statt (cid:18)((cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21) (cid:21)W)(ξ,....)(cid:16) (cid:18)N(ξ)(cid:16).
N(ξ) ist die Negation s(cid:228)mtlicher Werte der Satzvariablen
ξ.
5.503 Da sich o(cid:27)enbar leicht ausdr(cid:252)cken l(cid:228)sst, wie mit dieser Opera-
tion S(cid:228)tze gebildet werden k(cid:246)nnen und wie S(cid:228)tze mit ihr nicht
zu bilden sind, so muss dies auch einen exakten Ausdruck (cid:28)n-
den k(cid:246)nnen.
5.51 Hat ξ nur einen Wert, so ist N(ξ) = ∼p (nicht p), hat es zwei
Werte, so ist N(ξ) = ∼p . ∼q (weder p noch q).
5.511 Wie kann die allumfassende, weltspiegelnde Logik so spezielle
Haken und Manipulationen gebrauchen? Nur, indem sich al-
le diese zu einem unendlich feinen Netzwerk, zu dem grossen
Spiegel, verkn(cid:252)pfen.
5.512 (cid:18) ∼p(cid:16) ist wahr, wenn (cid:18)p(cid:16) falsch ist. Also in dem wahren Satz
(cid:18) ∼p(cid:16) ist (cid:18)p(cid:16) ein falscher Satz. Wie kann ihn nun der Strich
∼
(cid:18) (cid:16) mit der Wirklichkeit zum Stimmen bringen?
Das, was in (cid:18)
∼p(cid:16)
verneint, ist aber nicht das (cid:18)
∼
(cid:16), sondern
dasjenige, was allen Zeichen dieser Notation, welche p vernei-
nen, gemeinsam ist.
Also die gemeinsame Regel, nach welcher (cid:18)
∼p(cid:16),
(cid:18)
∼∼∼p(cid:16),
(cid:18) ∼p ∨ ∼p(cid:16), (cid:18) ∼p . ∼p(cid:16), etc. etc. (ad inf.) gebildet werden. Und
dies Gemeinsame spiegelt die Verneinung wider.
5.513 Man k(cid:246)nnte sagen: Das Gemeinsame aller Symbole, die sowohl
p als q bejahen, ist der Satz (cid:18)p . q(cid:16). Das Gemeinsame aller
Symbole, die entweder p oder q bejahen, ist der Satz (cid:18)p ∨ q(cid:16).
Und so kann man sagen: Zwei S(cid:228)tze sind einander entge-
gengesetzt, wenn sie nichts miteinander gemein haben, und:
Jeder Satz hat nur ein Negativ, weil es nur einen Satz gibt,
der ganz ausserhalb seiner liegt.
Es zeigt sich so auch in Russells Notation, dass (cid:18)q : p∨∼p(cid:16)
dasselbe sagt wie (cid:18)q(cid:16); dass (cid:18)p ∨ ∼p(cid:16) nichts sagt.
137

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
5.514 Ist eine Notation festgelegt, so gibt es in ihr eine Regel, nach
der alle p verneinenden S(cid:228)tze gebildet werden, eine Regel, nach
der alle p bejahenden S(cid:228)tze gebildet werden, eine Regel, nach
der alle p oder q bejahenden S(cid:228)tze gebildet werden, u. s. f. Die-
se Regeln sind den Symbolen (cid:228)quivalent und in ihnen spiegelt
sich ihr Sinn wider.
5.515 Es muss sich an unseren Symbolen zeigen, dass das, was durch
(cid:18)∨(cid:16), (cid:18).(cid:16), etc. miteinander verbunden ist, S(cid:228)tze sein m(cid:252)ssen.
Und dies ist auch der Fall, denn das Symbol (cid:18)p(cid:16) und (cid:18)q(cid:16)
setzt ja selbst das (cid:18)∨(cid:16), (cid:18) ∼ (cid:16), etc. voraus. Wenn das Zeichen (cid:18)p(cid:16)
in (cid:18)p ∨ q(cid:16) nicht f(cid:252)r ein komplexes Zeichen steht, dann kann es
allein nicht Sinn haben; dann k(cid:246)nnen aber auch die mit (cid:18)p(cid:16)
gleichsinnigen Zeichen (cid:18)p ∨ p(cid:16), (cid:18)p . p(cid:16), etc. keinen Sinn haben.
Wenn aber (cid:18)p ∨ p(cid:16) keinen Sinn hat, dann kann auch (cid:18)p ∨ q(cid:16)
keinen Sinn haben.
5.5151 Muss das Zeichen des negativen Satzes mit dem Zeichen des
positiven gebildet werden? Warum sollte man den negativen
Satz nicht durch eine negative Tatsache ausdr(cid:252)cken k(cid:246)nnen.
(Etwa: Wenn (cid:18)a(cid:16) nicht in einer bestimmten Beziehung zu (cid:18)b(cid:16)
steht, k(cid:246)nnte das ausdr(cid:252)cken, dass aRb nicht der Fall ist.)
Aber auch hier ist ja der negative Satz indirekt durch den
positiven gebildet.
Der positive Satz muss die Existenz des negativen Satzes
voraussetzen und umgekehrt.
5.52 Sind die Werte von ξ s(cid:228)mtliche Werte einer Funktion fx f(cid:252)r
alle Werte von x, so wird N(ξ) = ∼(∃x) . fx.
5.521 Ich trenne den Begri(cid:27) Alle von der Wahrheitsfunktion.
Frege und Russell haben die Allgemeinheit in Verbindung
mit dem logischen Produkt oder der logischen Summe einge-
f(cid:252)hrt. So wurde es schwer, die S(cid:228)tze (cid:18)(∃x) . fx(cid:16) und (cid:18)(x) . fx(cid:16),
in welchen beide Ideen beschlossen liegen, zu verstehen.
5.522 Das Eigent(cid:252)mliche der Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung ist erstens,
dass sie auf ein logisches Urbild hinweist, und zweitens, dass
sie Konstante hervorhebt.
5.523 Die Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung tritt als Argument auf.
138

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
5.524 Wenn die Gegenst(cid:228)nde gegeben sind, so sind uns damit auch
schon alle Gegenst(cid:228)nde gegeben.
Wenn die Elementars(cid:228)tze gegeben sind, so sind damit auch
alle Elementars(cid:228)tze gegeben.
5.525 Es ist unrichtig, den Satz (cid:18)(∃x) . fx(cid:16)(cid:22)wie Russell dies tut(cid:22)in
Worten durch (cid:18)fx ist m(cid:246)glich(cid:16) wiederzugeben.
Gewissheit, M(cid:246)glichkeit oder Unm(cid:246)glichkeit einer Sachlage
wird nicht durch einen Satz ausgedr(cid:252)ckt, sondern dadurch, dass
ein Ausdruck eine Tautologie, ein sinnvoller Satz, oder eine
Kontradiktion ist.
Jener Pr(cid:228)zedenzfall, auf den man sich immer berufen m(cid:246)ch-
te, muss schon im Symbol selber liegen.
5.526 Man kann die Welt vollst(cid:228)ndig durch vollkommen verallgemei-
nerte S(cid:228)tze beschreiben, das heisst also, ohne irgend einen Na-
men von vornherein einem bestimmten Gegenstand zuzuord-
nen.
Um dann auf die gew(cid:246)hnliche Ausdrucksweise zu kommen,
muss man einfach nach einem Ausdruck (cid:18)es gibt ein und nur
ein x, welches ....(cid:16) sagen: Und dies x ist a.
5.5261 Ein vollkommen verallgemeinerter Satz ist, wie jeder ande-
re Satz zusammengesetzt. (Dies zeigt sich daran, dass wir in
(cid:18)(∃x,ϕ).ϕx(cid:16) (cid:18)ϕ(cid:16) und (cid:18)x(cid:16) getrennt erw(cid:228)hnen m(cid:252)ssen. Beide ste-
hen unabh(cid:228)ngig in bezeichnenden Beziehungen zur Welt, wie
im unverallgemeinerten Satz.)
Kennzeichen des zusammengesetzten Symbols: Es hat etwas
mit anderen Symbolen gemeinsam.
5.5262 Es ver(cid:228)ndert ja die Wahr- oder Falschheit jedes Satzes etwas
am allgemeinen Bau der Welt. Und der Spielraum, welcher
ihrem Bau durch die Gesamtheit der Elementars(cid:228)tze gelassen
wird, ist eben derjenige, welchen die ganz allgemeinen S(cid:228)tze
begrenzen.
(Wenn ein Elementarsatz wahr ist, so ist damit doch jeden-
falls Ein Elementarsatz mehr wahr.)
5.53 Gleichheit des Gegenstandes dr(cid:252)cke ich durch Gleichheit des
Zeichens aus, und nicht mit Hilfe eines Gleichheitszeichens.
Verschiedenheit der Gegenst(cid:228)nde durch Verschiedenheit der
Zeichen.
139

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
5.5301 Dass die Identit(cid:228)t keine Relation zwischen Gegenst(cid:228)nden ist,
leuchtet ein. Dies wird sehr klar, wenn man z. B. den Satz
(cid:18)(x) : fx. ⊃ .x = a(cid:16) betrachtet. Was dieser Satz sagt, ist
einfach, dass nur a der Funktion f gen(cid:252)gt, und nicht, dass
nur solche Dinge der Funktion f gen(cid:252)gen, welche eine gewisse
Beziehung zu a haben.
Man k(cid:246)nnte nun freilich sagen, dass eben nur a diese
Beziehung zu a habe, aber um dies auszudr(cid:252)cken, brauchten
wir das Gleichheitszeichen selber.
5.5302 Russells De(cid:28)nition von (cid:18)=(cid:16) gen(cid:252)gt nicht; weil man nach ihr
nicht sagen kann, dass zwei Gegenst(cid:228)nde alle Eigenschaften
gemeinsam haben. (Selbst wenn dieser Satz nie richtig ist, hat
er doch Sinn.)
5.5303 Beil(cid:228)u(cid:28)g gesprochen: Von zwei Dingen zu sagen, sie seien
identisch, ist ein Unsinn, und von Einem zu sagen, es sei
identisch mit sich selbst, sagt gar nichts.
5.531 Ich schreibe also nicht (cid:18)f(a,b) . a = b(cid:16), sondern (cid:18)f(a,a)(cid:16) (oder
(cid:18)f(b,b)(cid:16)). Und nicht (cid:18)f(a,b) . ∼a = b(cid:16), sondern (cid:18)f(a,b)(cid:16).
5.532 Und analog: Nicht (cid:18)(∃x,y) . f(x,y) . x = y(cid:16), sondern (cid:18)(∃x) .
f(x,x)(cid:16); und nicht (cid:18)(∃x,y).f(x,y).∼x = y(cid:16), sondern (cid:18)(∃x,y).
f(x,y)(cid:16).
(Also statt des Russell’schen (cid:18)(∃x,y) . f(x,y)(cid:16): (cid:18)(∃x,y) .
f(x,y) . ∨ . (∃x) . f(x,x)(cid:16).)
5.5321 Statt (cid:18)(x) : fx ⊃ x = a(cid:16) schreiben wir also z. B. (cid:18)(∃x) . fx. ⊃
.fa : ∼(∃x,y) . fx . fy(cid:16).
Und der Satz (cid:18)nur Ein x befriedigt f()(cid:16) lautet: (cid:18)(∃x).fx :
∼(∃x,y) . fx . fy(cid:16).
5.533 Das Gleichheitszeichen ist also kein wesentlicher Bestandteil
der Begri(cid:27)sschrift.
5.534 Und nun sehen wir, dass Scheins(cid:228)tze wie: (cid:18)a = a(cid:16), (cid:18)a = b . b =
c. ⊃ a = c(cid:16), (cid:18)(x) . x = x(cid:16), (cid:18)(∃x) . x = a(cid:16), etc. sich in einer
richtigen Begri(cid:27)sschrift gar nicht hinschreiben lassen.
5.535 Damit erledigen sich auch alle Probleme, die an solche Schein-
s(cid:228)tze gekn(cid:252)pft waren.
Alle Probleme, die Russells (cid:18)Axiom of In(cid:28)nity(cid:16) mit sich
bringt, sind schon hier zu l(cid:246)sen.
140

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Das, was das Axiom of in(cid:28)nity sagen soll, w(cid:252)rde sich in der
Sprache dadurch ausdr(cid:252)cken, dass es unendlich viele Namen
mit verschiedener Bedeutung g(cid:228)be.
5.5351 Es gibt gewisse F(cid:228)lle, wo man in Versuchung ger(cid:228)t, Ausdr(cid:252)cke
von der Form (cid:18)a = a(cid:16) oder (cid:18)p ⊃ p(cid:16) u. dgl. zu ben(cid:252)tzen.
Und zwar geschieht dies, wenn man von dem Urbild: Satz,
Ding, etc. reden m(cid:246)chte. So hat Russell in den (cid:18)Principles of
Mathematics(cid:16) den Unsinn (cid:18)p ist ein Satz(cid:16) in Symbolen durch
(cid:18)p ⊃ p(cid:16) wiedergegeben und als Hypothese vor gewisse S(cid:228)tze
gestellt, damit deren Argumentstellen nur von S(cid:228)tzen besetzt
werden k(cid:246)nnten.
(Es ist schon darum Unsinn, die Hypothese p ⊃ p vor einen
Satz zu stellen, um ihm Argumente der richtigen Form zu si-
chern, weil die Hypothese f(cid:252)r einen Nicht-Satz als Argument
nicht falsch, sondern unsinnig wird, und weil der Satz selbst
durch die unrichtige Gattung von Argumenten unsinnig wird,
also sich selbst ebenso gut, oder so schlecht, vor den unrech-
ten Argumenten bewahrt, wie die zu diesem Zweck angeh(cid:228)ngte
sinnlose Hypothese.)
5.5352 Ebenso wollte man (cid:18)Es gibt keine Dinge(cid:16) ausdr(cid:252)cken durch
(cid:18) ∼(∃x).x = x(cid:16). Aber selbst wenn dies ein Satz w(cid:228)re,(cid:22)w(cid:228)re er
nicht auch wahr, wenn es zwar (cid:18)Dinge g(cid:228)be(cid:16), aber diese nicht
mit sich selbst identisch w(cid:228)ren?
5.54 In der allgemeinen Satzform kommt der Satz im Satze nur als
Basis der Wahrheitsoperationen vor.
5.541 Auf den ersten Blick scheint es, als k(cid:246)nne ein Satz in einem
anderen auch auf andere Weise vorkommen.
Besonders in gewissen Satzformen der Psychologie, wie (cid:18)A
glaubt, dass p der Fall ist(cid:16), oder (cid:18)A denkt p(cid:16), etc.
Hier scheint es n(cid:228)mlich ober(cid:29)(cid:228)chlich, als st(cid:252)nde der Satz p
zu einem Gegenstand A in einer Art von Relation.
(Und in der modernen Erkenntnistheorie (Russell, Moore,
etc.) sind jene S(cid:228)tze auch so aufgefasst worden.)
5.542 Es ist aber klar, dass (cid:18)A glaubt, dass p(cid:16), (cid:18)A denkt p(cid:16), (cid:18)A
sagt p(cid:16) von der Form (cid:18)(cid:13)p‘ sagt p(cid:16) sind: Und hier handelt es
sich nicht um eine Zuordnung von einer Tatsache und einem
141

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Gegenstand, sondern um die Zuordnung von Tatsachen durch
Zuordnung ihrer Gegenst(cid:228)nde.
5.5421 Dies zeigt auch, dass die Seele(cid:22)das Subjekt, etc.(cid:22)wie sie in
der heutigen ober(cid:29)(cid:228)chlichen Psychologie aufgefasst wird, ein
Unding ist.
Eine zusammengesetzte Seele w(cid:228)re n(cid:228)mlich keine Seele
mehr.
5.5422 Die richtige Erkl(cid:228)rung der Form des Satzes (cid:18)A urteilt p(cid:16) muss
zeigen, dass es unm(cid:246)glich ist, einen Unsinn zu urteilen. (Rus-
sells Theorie gen(cid:252)gt dieser Bedingung nicht.)
5.5423 Einen Komplex wahrnehmen, heisst, wahrnehmen, dass sich
seine Bestandteile so und so zu einander verhalten.
Dies erkl(cid:228)rt wohl auch, dass man die Figur
auf zweierlei Art als W(cid:252)rfel sehen kann; und alle (cid:228)hnlichen
Erscheinungen. Denn wir sehen eben wirklich zwei verschiedene
Tatsachen.
(Sehe ich erst auf die Ecken a und nur (cid:29)(cid:252)chtig auf b, so
erscheint a vorne; und umgekehrt.)
5.55 Wir m(cid:252)ssen nun die Frage nach allen m(cid:246)glichen Formen der
Elementars(cid:228)tze a priori beantworten.
Der Elementarsatz besteht aus Namen. Da wir aber die
Anzahl der Namen von verschiedener Bedeutung nicht angeben
k(cid:246)nnen, so k(cid:246)nnen wir auch nicht die Zusammensetzung des
Elementarsatzes angeben.
5.551 Unser Grundsatz ist, dass jede Frage, die sich (cid:252)berhaupt durch
die Logik entscheiden l(cid:228)sst, sich ohne weiteres entscheiden las-
sen muss.
142

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
(Und wenn wir in die Lage kommen, ein solches Problem
durch Ansehen der Welt beantworten zu m(cid:252)ssen, so zeigt dies,
dass wir auf grundfalscher F(cid:228)hrte sind.)
5.552 Die (cid:18)Erfahrung(cid:16), die wir zum Verstehen der Logik brauchen,
ist nicht die, dass sich etwas so und so verh(cid:228)lt, sondern, dass
etwas ist: aber das ist eben keine Erfahrung.
Die Logik ist vor jeder Erfahrung(cid:22)dass etwas so ist.
Sie ist vor dem Wie, nicht vor dem Was.
5.5521 Und wenn dies nicht so w(cid:228)re, wie k(cid:246)nnten wir die Logik anwen-
den? Man k(cid:246)nnte sagen: Wenn es eine Logik g(cid:228)be, auch wenn
es keine Welt g(cid:228)be, wie k(cid:246)nnte es dann eine Logik geben, da
es eine Welt gibt.
5.553 Russell sagte, es g(cid:228)be einfache Relationen zwischen verschie-
denen Anzahlen von Dingen (Individuals). Aber zwischen wel-
chen Anzahlen? Und wie soll sich das entscheiden?(cid:22)Durch die
Erfahrung?
(Eine ausgezeichnete Zahl gibt es nicht.)
5.554 Die Angabe jeder speziellen Form w(cid:228)re vollkommen willk(cid:252)rlich.
5.5541 Es soll sich a priori angeben lassen, ob ich z. B. in die Lage
kommen kann, etwas mit dem Zeichen einer 27-stelligen Rela-
tion bezeichnen zu m(cid:252)ssen.
5.5542 D(cid:252)rfen wir denn aber (cid:252)berhaupt so fragen? K(cid:246)nnen wir eine
Zeichenform aufstellen und nicht wissen, ob ihr etwas entspre-
chen k(cid:246)nne?
Hat die Frage einen Sinn: Was muss sein, damit etwas
der-Fall-sein kann?
5.555 Es ist klar, wir haben vom Elementarsatz einen Begri(cid:27), abge-
sehen von seiner besonderen logischen Form.
Wo man aber Symbole nach einem System bilden kann,
dort ist dieses System das logisch wichtige und nicht die ein-
zelnen Symbole.
Und wie w(cid:228)re es auch m(cid:246)glich, dass ich es in der Logik mit
Formen zu tun h(cid:228)tte, die ich er(cid:28)nden kann; sondern mit dem
muss ich es zu tun haben, was es mir m(cid:246)glich macht, sie zu
er(cid:28)nden.
143

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
5.556 Eine Hierarchie der Formen der Elementars(cid:228)tze kann es nicht
geben. Nur was wir selbst konstruieren, k(cid:246)nnen wir vorausse-
hen.
5.5561 Die empirische Realit(cid:228)t ist begrenzt durch die Gesamtheit der
Gegenst(cid:228)nde. Die Grenze zeigt sich wieder in der Gesamtheit
der Elementars(cid:228)tze.
Die Hierarchien sind, und m(cid:252)ssen unabh(cid:228)ngig von der Rea-
lit(cid:228)t sein.
5.5562 Wissen wir aus rein logischen Gr(cid:252)nden, dass es Elementars(cid:228)tze
geben muss, dann muss es jeder wissen, der die S(cid:228)tze in ihrer
unanalysierten Form versteht.
5.5563 Alle S(cid:228)tze unserer Umgangssprache sind tats(cid:228)chlich, so wie
sie sind, logisch vollkommen geordnet.(cid:22)Jenes Einfachste, was
wir hier angeben sollen, ist nicht ein Gleichnis der Wahrheit,
sondern die volle Wahrheit selbst.
(Unsere Probleme sind nicht abstrakt, sondern vielleicht die
konkretesten, die es gibt.)
5.557 Die Anwendung der Logik entscheidet dar(cid:252)ber, welche Ele-
mentars(cid:228)tze es gibt.
Was in der Anwendung liegt, kann die Logik nicht voraus-
nehmen.
Das ist klar: Die Logik darf mit ihrer Anwendung nicht
kollidieren.
Aber die Logik muss sich mit ihrer Anwendung ber(cid:252)hren.
Also d(cid:252)rfen die Logik und ihre Anwendung einander nicht
(cid:252)bergreifen.
5.5571 Wenn ich die Elementars(cid:228)tze nicht a priori angeben kann, dann
muss es zu o(cid:27)enbarem Unsinn f(cid:252)hren, sie angeben zu wollen.
5.6 Die Grenzen meiner Sprache bedeuten die Grenzen
meiner Welt.
5.61 Die Logik erf(cid:252)llt die Welt; die Grenzen der Welt sind auch ihre
Grenzen.
Wir k(cid:246)nnen also in der Logik nicht sagen: Das und das gibt
es in der Welt, jenes nicht.
Das w(cid:252)rde n(cid:228)mlich scheinbar voraussetzen, dass wir gewisse
M(cid:246)glichkeiten ausschliessen und dies kann nicht der Fall sein,
144

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
da sonst die Logik (cid:252)ber die Grenzen der Welt hinaus m(cid:252)sste;
wenn sie n(cid:228)mlich diese Grenzen auch von der anderen Seite
betrachten k(cid:246)nnte.
Was wir nicht denken k(cid:246)nnen, das k(cid:246)nnen wir nicht den-
ken; wir k(cid:246)nnen also auch nicht sagen, was wir nicht denken
k(cid:246)nnen.
5.62 Diese Bemerkung gibt den Schl(cid:252)ssel zur Entscheidung der Fra-
ge, inwieweit der Solipsismus eine Wahrheit ist.
Was der Solipsismus n(cid:228)mlich meint, ist ganz richtig, nur
l(cid:228)sst es sich nicht sagen, sondern es zeigt sich.
Dass die Welt meine Welt ist, das zeigt sich darin, dass
die Grenzen der Sprache (der Sprache, die allein ich verstehe)
die Grenzen meiner Welt bedeuten.
5.621 Die Welt und das Leben sind Eins.
5.63 Ich bin meine Welt. (Der Mikrokosmos.)
5.631 Das denkende, vorstellende, Subjekt gibt es nicht.
Wenn ich ein Buch schriebe (cid:18)Die Welt, wie ich sie vor-
fand(cid:16), so w(cid:228)re darin auch (cid:252)ber meinen Leib zu berichten und
zu sagen, welche Glieder meinem Willen unterstehen und wel-
che nicht etc., dies ist n(cid:228)mlich eine Methode, das Subjekt zu
isolieren, oder vielmehr zu zeigen, dass es in einem wichtigen
Sinne kein Subjekt gibt: Von ihm allein n(cid:228)mlich k(cid:246)nnte in die-
sem Buche nicht die Rede sein.(cid:22)
5.632 Das Subjekt geh(cid:246)rt nicht zur Welt, sondern es ist eine Grenze
der Welt.
5.633 Wo in der Welt ist ein metaphysisches Subjekt zu merken?
Du sagst, es verh(cid:228)lt sich hier ganz, wie mit Auge und Ge-
sichtsfeld. Aber das Auge siehst du wirklich nicht.
Und nichts am Gesichtsfeld l(cid:228)sst darauf schliessen,
dass es von einem Auge gesehen wird.
5.6331 Das Gesichtsfeld hat n(cid:228)mlich nicht etwa eine solche Form:
145

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
5.634 Das h(cid:228)ngt damit zusammen, dass kein Teil unserer Erfahrung
auch a priori ist.
Alles, was wir sehen, k(cid:246)nnte auch anders sein.
Alles, was wir (cid:252)berhaupt beschreiben k(cid:246)nnen, k(cid:246)nnte auch
anders sein.
Es gibt keine Ordnung der Dinge a priori.
5.64 Hier sieht man, dass der Solipsismus, streng durchgef(cid:252)hrt, mit
dem reinen Realismus zusammenf(cid:228)llt. Das Ich des Solipsis-
mus schrumpft zum ausdehnungslosen Punkt zusammen, und
es bleibt die ihm koordinierte Realit(cid:228)t.
5.641 Es gibt also wirklich einen Sinn, in welchem in der Philosophie
nicht-psychologisch vom Ich die Rede sein kann.
Das Ich tritt in die Philosophie dadurch ein, dass die (cid:18)Welt
meine Welt ist(cid:16).
Das philosophische Ich ist nicht der Mensch, nicht der
menschliche K(cid:246)rper, oder die menschliche Seele, von der die
Psychologie handelt, sondern das metaphysische Subjekt, die
Grenze(cid:22)nicht ein Teil der Welt.
6 Die allgemeine Form der Wahrheitsfunktion ist: [p,ξ,N(ξ)].
Dies ist die allgemeine Form des Satzes.
6.001 Dies sagt nichts anderes, als dass jeder Satz ein Resultat der
successiven Anwendung der Operation N′(ξ) auf die Elemen-
tars(cid:228)tze ist.
6.002 Ist die allgemeine Form gegeben, wie ein Satz gebaut ist, so ist
damit auch schon die allgemeine Form davon gegeben, wie aus
einem Satz durch eine Operation ein anderer erzeugt werden
kann.
6.01 Die allgemeine Form der Operation Ω′(η) ist also: [ξ,N(ξ)]′(η)
(= [η, ξ, N(ξ)]).
Das ist die allgemeinste Form des (cid:220)berganges von einem
Satz zum anderen.
6.02 Und so kommen wir zu den Zahlen: Ich de(cid:28)niere
x = Ω0′x Def. und
Ω′Ων′x = Ων+1′x Def.
146

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Nach diesen Zeichenregeln schreiben wir also die Reihe x,
Ω′x, Ω′Ω′x, Ω′Ω′Ω′x, .....
so: Ω0′x,Ω0+1′x,Ω0+1+1′x,Ω0+1+1+1′x,.....
Also schreibe ich statt (cid:18)[x,ξ,Ω′ξ](cid:16):
(cid:18)[Ω0′x,Ων′x,Ων+1′x](cid:16).
Und de(cid:28)niere:
0 + 1 = 1 Def.
0 + 1 + 1 = 2 Def.
0 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 3 Def.
(u. s. f.)
6.021 Die Zahl ist der Exponent einer Operation.
6.022 Der Zahlbegri(cid:27) ist nichts anderes, als das Gemeinsame aller
Zahlen, die allgemeine Form der Zahl.
Der Zahlbegri(cid:27) ist die variable Zahl.
Und der Begri(cid:27) der Zahlengleichheit ist die allgemeine Form
aller speziellen Zahlengleichheiten.
6.03 Die allgemeine Form der ganzen Zahl ist: [0,ξ,ξ + 1].
6.031 Die Theorie der Klassen ist in der Mathematik ganz (cid:252)ber(cid:29)(cid:252)s-
sig.
Dies h(cid:228)ngt damit zusammen, dass die Allgemeinheit, welche
wir in der Mathematik brauchen, nicht die zuf(cid:228)llige ist.
6.1 Die S(cid:228)tze der Logik sind Tautologien.
6.11 Die S(cid:228)tze der Logik sagen also Nichts. (Sie sind die analyti-
schen S(cid:228)tze.)
6.111 Theorien, die einen Satz der Logik gehaltvoll erscheinen lassen,
sind immer falsch. Man k(cid:246)nnte z. B. glauben, dass die Worte
(cid:18)wahr(cid:16) und (cid:18)falsch(cid:16) zwei Eigenschaften unter anderen Eigen-
schaften bezeichnen, und da erschiene es als eine merkw(cid:252)rdige
Tatsache, dass jeder Satz eine dieser Eigenschaften besitzt. Das
scheint nun nichts weniger als selbstverst(cid:228)ndlich zu sein, eben-
sowenig selbstverst(cid:228)ndlich, wie etwa der Satz, (cid:18)alle Rosen sind
147

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
entweder gelb oder rot(cid:16) kl(cid:228)nge, auch wenn er wahr w(cid:228)re. Ja,
jener Satz bekommt nun ganz den Charakter eines naturwis-
senschaftlichen Satzes und dies ist das sichere Anzeichen daf(cid:252)r,
dass er falsch aufgefasst wurde.
6.112 Die richtige Erkl(cid:228)rung der logischen S(cid:228)tze muss ihnen eine
einzigartige Stellung unter allen S(cid:228)tzen geben.
6.113 Es ist das besondere Merkmal der logischen S(cid:228)tze, dass man
am Symbol allein erkennen kann, dass sie wahr sind, und diese
Tatsache schliesst die ganze Philosophie der Logik in sich. Und
so ist es auch eine der wichtigsten Tatsachen, dass sich die
Wahrheit oder Falschheit der nicht-logischen S(cid:228)tze nicht am
Satz allein erkennen l(cid:228)sst.
6.12 Dass die S(cid:228)tze der Logik Tautologien sind, das zeigt die for-
malen(cid:22)logischen(cid:22)Eigenschaften der Sprache, der Welt.
Dass ihre Bestandteile so verkn(cid:252)pft eine Tautologie erge-
ben, das charakterisiert die Logik ihrer Bestandteile.
Damit S(cid:228)tze, auf bestimmte Art und Weise verkn(cid:252)pft, eine
Tautologie ergeben, dazu m(cid:252)ssen sie bestimmte Eigenschaften
der Struktur haben. Dass sie so verbunden eine Tautologie
ergeben, zeigt also, dass sie diese Eigenschaften der Struktur
besitzen.
6.1201 Dass z. B. die S(cid:228)tze (cid:18)p(cid:16) und (cid:18) ∼p(cid:16) in der Verbindung (cid:18) ∼(p.∼p)(cid:16)
eine Tautologie ergeben, zeigt, dass sie einander widersprechen.
Dass die S(cid:228)tze (cid:18)p ⊃ q(cid:16), (cid:18)p(cid:16) und (cid:18)q(cid:16) in der Form (cid:18)(p ⊃ q).(p) :⊃:
(q)(cid:16) miteinander verbunden eine Tautologie ergeben, zeigt, dass
q aus p und p ⊃ q folgt. Dass (cid:18)(x) . fx :⊃: fa(cid:16) eine Tautologie
ist, dass fa aus (x) . fx folgt. etc. etc.
6.1202 Es ist klar, dass man zu demselben Zweck statt der Tautologien
auch die Kontradiktionen verwenden k(cid:246)nnte.
6.1203 Um eine Tautologie als solche zu erkennen, kann man
sich, in den F(cid:228)llen, in welchen in der Tautologie keine
Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung vorkommt, folgender anschaulichen
Methode bedienen: Ich schreibe statt (cid:18)p(cid:16), (cid:18)q(cid:16), (cid:18)r(cid:16) etc. (cid:18)WpF(cid:16),
(cid:18)WqF(cid:16), (cid:18)WrF(cid:16) etc. Die Wahrheitskombinationen dr(cid:252)cke ich
durch Klammern aus. z. B.:
148

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
und die Zuordnung der Wahr- oder Falschheit des ganzen Sat-
zes und der Wahrheitskombinationen der Wahrheitsargumente
durch Striche auf folgende Weise:
Dies Zeichen w(cid:252)rde also z. B. den Satz p ⊃ q darstellen. Nun
will ich z. B. den Satz ∼(p . ∼p) (Gesetz des Widerspruchs)
daraufhin untersuchen, ob er eine Tautologie ist. Die Form
(cid:18)
∼ξ(cid:16)
wird in unserer Notation
geschrieben; die Form (cid:18)ξ . η(cid:16) so:
Daher lautet der Satz ∼(p . ∼q) so:
149

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Setzen wir hier statt (cid:18)q(cid:16) (cid:18)p(cid:16) ein und untersuchen die Verbin-
dung der (cid:228)ussersten W und F mit den innersten, so ergibt
sich, dass die Wahrheit des ganzen Satzes allen Wahrheits-
kombinationen seines Argumentes, seine Falschheit keiner der
Wahrheitskombinationen zugeordnet ist.
6.121 Die S(cid:228)tze der Logik demonstrieren die logischen Eigenschaften
der S(cid:228)tze, indem sie sie zu nichtssagenden S(cid:228)tzen verbinden.
Diese Methode k(cid:246)nnte man auch eine Nullmethode nennen.
Im logischen Satz werden S(cid:228)tze miteinander ins Gleichgewicht
gebracht und der Zustand des Gleichgewichts zeigt dann an,
wie diese S(cid:228)tze logisch bescha(cid:27)en sein m(cid:252)ssen.
6.122 Daraus ergibt sich, dass wir auch ohne die logischen S(cid:228)tze
auskommen k(cid:246)nnen, da wir ja in einer entsprechenden Notation
die formalen Eigenschaften der S(cid:228)tze durch das blosse Ansehen
dieser S(cid:228)tze erkennen k(cid:246)nnen.
6.1221 Ergeben z. B. zwei S(cid:228)tze (cid:18)p(cid:16) und (cid:18)q(cid:16) in der Verbindung (cid:18)p ⊃ q(cid:16)
eine Tautologie, so ist klar, dass q aus p folgt.
Dass z. B. (cid:18)q(cid:16) aus (cid:18)p ⊃ q . p(cid:16) folgt, ersehen wir aus diesen
beiden S(cid:228)tzen selbst, aber wir k(cid:246)nnen es auch so zeigen, indem
wir sie zu (cid:18)p ⊃ q . p :⊃: q(cid:16) verbinden und nun zeigen, dass dies
eine Tautologie ist.
6.1222 Dies wirft ein Licht auf die Frage, warum die logischen S(cid:228)t-
ze nicht durch die Erfahrung best(cid:228)tigt werden k(cid:246)nnen, ebenso
wenig, wie sie durch die Erfahrung widerlegt werden k(cid:246)nnen.
Nicht nur muss ein Satz der Logik durch keine m(cid:246)gliche Er-
fahrung widerlegt werden k(cid:246)nnen, sondern er darf auch nicht
durch eine solche best(cid:228)tigt werden k(cid:246)nnen.
6.1223 Nun wird klar, warum man oft f(cid:252)hlte, als w(cid:228)ren die (cid:18)logischen
Wahrheiten(cid:16) von uns zu (cid:18)fordern(cid:16): Wir k(cid:246)nnen sie n(cid:228)mlich
insofern fordern, als wir eine gen(cid:252)gende Notation fordern k(cid:246)n-
nen.
6.1224 Es wird jetzt auch klar, warum die Logik die Lehre von den
Formen und vom Schliessen genannt wurde.
6.123 Es ist klar: Die logischen Gesetze d(cid:252)rfen nicht selbst wieder
logischen Gesetzen unterstehen.
(Es gibt nicht, wie Russell meinte, f(cid:252)r jede (cid:18)Type(cid:16) ein ei-
150

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
genes Gesetz des Widerspruches, sondern Eines gen(cid:252)gt, da es
auf sich selbst nicht angewendet wird.)
6.1231 Das Anzeichen des logischen Satzes ist nicht die Allgemein-
g(cid:252)ltigkeit.
Allgemein sein, heisst ja nur: Zuf(cid:228)lligerweise f(cid:252)r alle Dinge
gelten. Ein unverallgemeinerter Satz kann ja ebensowohl tau-
tologisch sein, als ein verallgemeinerter.
6.1232 Die logische Allgemeing(cid:252)ltigkeit k(cid:246)nnte man wesentlich nen-
nen, im Gegensatz zu jener zuf(cid:228)lligen, etwa des Satzes (cid:18)alle
Menschen sind sterblich(cid:16). S(cid:228)tze, wie Russells (cid:18)Axiom of redu-
cibility(cid:16) sind nicht logische S(cid:228)tze, und dies erkl(cid:228)rt unser Ge-
f(cid:252)hl: Dass sie, wenn wahr, so doch nur durch einen g(cid:252)nstigen
Zufall wahr sein k(cid:246)nnten.
6.1233 Es l(cid:228)sst sich eine Welt denken, in der das Axiom of reducibility
nicht gilt. Es ist aber klar, dass die Logik nichts mit der Frage
zu scha(cid:27)en hat, ob unsere Welt wirklich so ist oder nicht.
6.124 Die logischen S(cid:228)tze beschreiben das Ger(cid:252)st der Welt, oder viel-
mehr, sie stellen es dar. Sie (cid:18)handeln(cid:16) von nichts. Sie setzen
voraus, dass Namen Bedeutung, und Elementars(cid:228)tze Sinn ha-
ben: Und dies ist ihre Verbindung mit der Welt. Es ist klar,
dass es etwas (cid:252)ber die Welt anzeigen muss, dass gewisse Ver-
bindungen von Symbolen(cid:22)welche wesentlich einen bestimmten
Charakter haben(cid:22)Tautologien sind. Hierin liegt das Entschei-
dende. Wir sagten, manches an den Symbolen, die wir gebrau-
chen, w(cid:228)re willk(cid:252)rlich, manches nicht. In der Logik dr(cid:252)ckt nur
dieses aus: Dass heisst aber, in der Logik dr(cid:252)cken nicht wir
mit Hilfe der Zeichen aus, was wir wollen, sondern in der Logik
sagt die Natur der naturnotwendigen Zeichen selbst aus: Wenn
wir die logische Syntax irgend einer Zeichensprache kennen,
dann sind bereits alle S(cid:228)tze der Logik gegeben.
6.125 Es ist m(cid:246)glich, und zwar auch nach der alten Au(cid:27)assung der
Logik, von vornherein eine Beschreibung aller (cid:18)wahren(cid:16) logi-
schen S(cid:228)tze zu geben.
6.1251 Darum kann es in der Logik auch nie (cid:220)berraschungen geben.
6.126 Ob ein Satz der Logik angeh(cid:246)rt, kann man berechnen, indem
man die logischen Eigenschaften des Symb ols berechnet.
151

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
Und dies tun wir, wenn wir einen logischen Satz (cid:18)beweisen(cid:16).
Denn, ohne uns um einen Sinn und eine Bedeutung zu k(cid:252)m-
mern, bilden wir den logischen Satz aus anderen nach blossen
Zeichenregeln.
Der Beweis der logischen S(cid:228)tze besteht darin, dass wir sie
aus anderen logischen S(cid:228)tzen durch successive Anwendung ge-
wisser Operationen entstehen lassen, die aus den ersten immer
wieder Tautologien erzeugen. (Und zwar folgen aus einer
Tautologie nur Tautologien.)
Nat(cid:252)rlich ist diese Art zu zeigen, dass ihre S(cid:228)tze Tautolo-
gien sind, der Logik durchaus unwesentlich. Schon darum, weil
die S(cid:228)tze, von welchen der Beweis ausgeht, ja ohne Beweis
zeigen m(cid:252)ssen, dass sie Tautologien sind.
6.1261 In der Logik sind Prozess und Resultat (cid:228)quivalent. (Darum
keine (cid:220)berraschung.)
6.1262 Der Beweis in der Logik ist nur ein mechanisches Hilfsmittel
zum leichteren Erkennen der Tautologie, wo sie kompliziert ist.
6.1263 Es w(cid:228)re ja auch zu merkw(cid:252)rdig, wenn man einen sinnvollen
Satz logisch aus anderen beweisen k(cid:246)nnte, und einen logi-
schen Satz auch. Es ist von vornherein klar, dass der logische
Beweis eines sinnvollen Satzes und der Beweis in der Logik
zwei ganz verschiedene Dinge sein m(cid:252)ssen.
6.1264 Der sinnvolle Satz sagt etwas aus, und sein Beweis zeigt, dass
es so ist; in der Logik ist jeder Satz die Form eines Beweises.
Jeder Satz der Logik ist ein in Zeichen dargestellter modus
ponens. (Und den modus ponens kann man nicht durch einen
Satz ausdr(cid:252)cken.)
6.1265 Immer kann man die Logik so au(cid:27)assen, dass jeder Satz sein
eigener Beweis ist.
6.127 Alle S(cid:228)tze der Logik sind gleichberechtigt, es gibt unter ihnen
nicht wesentlich Grundgesetze und abgeleitete S(cid:228)tze.
Jede Tautologie zeigt selbst, dass sie eine Tautologie ist.
6.1271 Es ist klar, dass die Anzahl der (cid:18)logischen Grundgesetze(cid:16) will-
k(cid:252)rlich ist, denn man k(cid:246)nnte die Logik ja aus Einem Grundge-
setz ableiten, indem man einfach z. B. aus Freges Grundgeset-
152

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
zen das logische Produkt bildet. (Frege w(cid:252)rde vielleicht sagen,
dass dieses Grundgesetz nun nicht mehr unmittelbar einleuch-
te. Aber es ist merkw(cid:252)rdig, dass ein so exakter Denker wie
Frege sich auf den Grad des Einleuchtens als Kriterium des
logischen Satzes berufen hat.)
6.13 Die Logik ist keine Lehre, sondern ein Spiegelbild der Welt.
Die Logik ist transcendental.
6.2 Die Mathematik ist eine logische Methode.
Die S(cid:228)tze der Mathematik sind Gleichungen also Scheins(cid:228)t-
ze.
6.21 Der Satz der Mathematik dr(cid:252)ckt keinen Gedanken aus.
6.211 Im Leben ist es ja nie der mathematische Satz, den wir brau-
chen, sondern wir ben(cid:252)tzen den mathematischen Satz nur,
um aus S(cid:228)tzen, welche nicht der Mathematik angeh(cid:246)ren, auf
andere zu schliessen, welche gleichfalls nicht der Mathematik
angeh(cid:246)ren.
(In der Philosophie f(cid:252)hrt die Frage (cid:18)wozu gebrauchen wir
eigentlich jenes Wort, jenen Satz(cid:16) immer wieder zu wertvollen
Einsichten.)
6.22 Die Logik der Welt, die die S(cid:228)tze der Logik in den Tautologien
zeigen, zeigt die Mathematik in den Gleichungen.
6.23 Wenn zwei Ausdr(cid:252)cke durch das Gleichheitszeichen verbunden
werden, so heisst das, sie sind durch einander ersetzbar. Ob
dies aber der Fall ist muss sich an den beiden Ausdr(cid:252)cken
selbst zeigen.
Es charakterisiert die logische Form zweier Ausdr(cid:252)cke, dass
sie durch einander ersetzbar sind.
6.231 Es ist eine Eigenschaft der Bejahung, dass man sie als doppelte
Verneinung au(cid:27)assen kann.
Es ist eine Eigenschaft von (cid:18)1 + 1 + 1 + 1(cid:16), dass man es als
(cid:18)(1 + 1) + (1 + 1)(cid:16) au(cid:27)assen kann.
6.232 Frege sagt, die beiden Ausdr(cid:252)cke haben dieselbe Bedeutung,
aber verschiedenen Sinn.
Das Wesentliche an der Gleichung ist aber, dass sie nicht
notwendig ist, um zu zeigen, dass die beiden Ausdr(cid:252)cke, die
153

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
das Gleichheitszeichen verbindet, dieselbe Bedeutung haben,
da sich dies aus den beiden Ausdr(cid:252)cken selbst ersehen l(cid:228)sst.
6.2321 Und, dass die S(cid:228)tze der Mathematik bewiesen werden k(cid:246)nnen,
heisst ja nichts anderes, als dass ihre Richtigkeit einzusehen ist,
ohne dass das, was sie ausdr(cid:252)cken, selbst mit den Tatsachen
auf seine Richtigkeit hin verglichen werden muss.
6.2322 Die Identit(cid:228)t der Bedeutung zweier Ausdr(cid:252)cke l(cid:228)sst sich nicht
b ehaupten. Denn um etwas von ihrer Bedeutung behaupten
zu k(cid:246)nnen, muss ich ihre Bedeutung kennen: und indem ich
ihre Bedeutung kenne, weiss ich, ob sie dasselbe oder verschie-
denes bedeuten.
6.2323 Die Gleichung kennzeichnet nur den Standpunkt, von welchem
ich die beiden Ausdr(cid:252)cke betrachte, n(cid:228)mlich vom Standpunkte
ihrer Bedeutungsgleichheit.
6.233 Die Frage, ob man zur L(cid:246)sung der mathematischen Probleme
die Anschauung brauche, muss dahin beantwortet werden, dass
eben die Sprache hier die n(cid:246)tige Anschauung liefert.
6.2331 Der Vorgang des Rechnens vermittelt eben diese Anschau-
ung.
Die Rechnung ist kein Experiment.
6.234 Die Mathematik ist eine Methode der Logik.
6.2341 Das Wesentliche der mathematischen Methode ist es, mit Glei-
chungen zu arbeiten. Auf dieser Methode beruht es n(cid:228)mlich,
dass jeder Satz der Mathematik sich von selbst verstehen muss.
6.24 Die Methode der Mathematik, zu ihren Gleichungen zu kom-
men, ist die Substitutionsmethode.
Denn die Gleichungen dr(cid:252)cken die Ersetzbarkeit zweier
Ausdr(cid:252)cke aus und wir schreiten von einer Anzahl von
Gleichungen zu neuen Gleichungen vor, indem wir, den
Gleichungen entsprechend, Ausdr(cid:252)cke durch andere ersetzen.
6.241 So lautet der Beweis des Satzes 2 × 2 = 4:
(Ων)µ′x = Ων×µ′x Def.
Ω2×2′x = (Ω2)2′x = (Ω2)1+1′x = Ω2′Ω2′x = Ω1+1′Ω1+1′x
= (Ω′Ω)′(Ω′Ω)′x = Ω′Ω′Ω′Ω′x = Ω1+1+1+1′x = Ω4′x.
154

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
6.3 Die Erforschung der Logik bedeutet die Erforschung aller
Gesetzm(cid:228)ssigkeit. Und ausserhalb der Logik ist alles Zu-
fall.
6.31 Das sogenannte Gesetz der Induktion kann jedenfalls kein lo-
gisches Gesetz sein, denn es ist o(cid:27)enbar ein sinnvoller Satz.(cid:22)
Und darum kann es auch kein Gesetz a priori sein.
6.32 Das Kausalit(cid:228)tsgesetz ist kein Gesetz, sondern die Form eines
Gesetzes.
6.321 (cid:18)Kausalit(cid:228)tsgesetz(cid:16), das ist ein Gattungsname. Und wie es in
der Mechanik, sagen wir, Minimum-Gesetze gibt,(cid:22)etwa der
kleinsten Wirkung(cid:22)so gibt es in der Physik Kausalit(cid:228)tsgesetze,
Gesetze von der Kausalit(cid:228)tsform.
6.3211 Man hat ja auch davon eine Ahnung gehabt, dass es ein (cid:18)Ge-
setz der kleinsten Wirkung(cid:16) geben m(cid:252)sse, ehe man genau wuss-
te, wie es lautete. (Hier, wie immer, stellt sich das a priori
Gewisse als etwas rein Logisches heraus.)
6.33 Wir glaub en nicht a priori an ein Erhaltungsgesetz, sondern
wir wissen a priori die M(cid:246)glichkeit einer logischen Form.
6.34 Alle jene S(cid:228)tze, wie der Satz vom Grunde, von der Kontinuit(cid:228)t
in der Natur, vom kleinsten Aufwande in der Natur etc. etc.,
alle diese sind Einsichten a priori (cid:252)ber die m(cid:246)gliche Formge-
bung der S(cid:228)tze der Wissenschaft.
6.341 Die Newtonsche Mechanik z. B. bringt die Weltbeschreibung
auf eine einheitliche Form. Denken wir uns eine weisse Fl(cid:228)-
che, auf der unregelm(cid:228)ssige schwarze Flecken w(cid:228)ren. Wir sa-
gen nun: Was f(cid:252)r ein Bild immer hierdurch entsteht, immer
kann ich seiner Beschreibung beliebig nahe kommen, indem
ich die Fl(cid:228)che mit einem entsprechend feinen quadratischen
Netzwerk bedecke und nun von jedem Quadrat sage, dass es
weiss oder schwarz ist. Ich werde auf diese Weise die Beschrei-
bung der Fl(cid:228)che auf eine einheitliche Form gebracht haben.
Diese Form ist beliebig, denn ich h(cid:228)tte mit dem gleichen Er-
folge ein Netz aus dreieckigen oder sechseckigen Maschen ver-
wenden k(cid:246)nnen. Es kann sein, dass die Beschreibung mit Hil-
fe eines Dreiecks-Netzes einfacher geworden w(cid:228)re; das heisst,
dass wir die Fl(cid:228)che mit einem gr(cid:246)beren Dreiecks-Netz genau-
155

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
er beschreiben k(cid:246)nnten, als mit einem feineren quadratischen
(oder umgekehrt) usw. Den verschiedenen Netzen entsprechen
verschiedene Systeme der Weltbeschreibung. Die Mechanik be-
stimmt eine Form der Weltbeschreibung, indem sie sagt: Alle
S(cid:228)tze der Weltbeschreibung m(cid:252)ssen aus einer Anzahl gegebe-
ner S(cid:228)tze(cid:22)den mechanischen Axiomen(cid:22)auf eine gegebene Art
und Weise erhalten werden. Hierdurch liefert sie die Bausteine
zum Bau des wissenschaftlichen Geb(cid:228)udes und sagt: Welches
Geb(cid:228)ude immer du au(cid:27)(cid:252)hren willst, jedes musst du irgendwie
mit diesen und nur diesen Bausteinen zusammenbringen.
(Wie man mit dem Zahlensystem jede beliebige Anzahl, so
muss man mit dem System der Mechanik jeden beliebigen Satz
der Physik hinschreiben k(cid:246)nnen.)
6.342 Und nun sehen wir die gegenseitige Stellung von Logik und
Mechanik. (Man k(cid:246)nnte das Netz auch aus verschiedenartigen
Figuren etwa aus Dreiecken und Sechsecken bestehen lassen.)
Dass sich ein Bild, wie das vorhin erw(cid:228)hnte, durch ein Netz von
gegebener Form beschreiben l(cid:228)sst, sagt (cid:252)ber das Bild nichts
aus. (Denn dies gilt f(cid:252)r jedes Bild dieser Art.) Das aber
charakterisiert das Bild, dass es sich durch ein bestimmtes Netz
von b estimmter Feinheit vollst(cid:228)ndig beschreiben l(cid:228)sst.
So auch sagt es nichts (cid:252)ber die Welt aus, dass sie sich
durch die Newtonsche Mechanik beschreiben l(cid:228)sst; wohl aber,
dass sie sich so durch jene beschreiben l(cid:228)sst, wie dies eben
der Fall ist. Auch das sagt etwas (cid:252)ber die Welt, dass sie sich
durch die eine Mechanik einfacher beschreiben l(cid:228)sst, als durch
die andere.
6.343 Die Mechanik ist ein Versuch, alle wahren S(cid:228)tze, die wir zur
Weltbeschreibung brauchen, nach Einem Plane zu konstruie-
ren.
6.3431 Durch den ganzen logischen Apparat hindurch sprechen die
physikalischen Gesetze doch von den Gegenst(cid:228)nden der Welt.
6.3432 Wir d(cid:252)rfen nicht vergessen, dass die Weltbeschreibung durch
die Mechanik immer die ganz allgemeine ist. Es ist in ihr z. B.
nie von b estimmten materiellen Punkten die Rede, sondern
immer nur von irgend welchen.
6.35 Obwohl die Flecke in unserem Bild geometrische Figuren sind,
156

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
so kann doch selbstverst(cid:228)ndlich die Geometrie gar nichts (cid:252)ber
ihre tats(cid:228)chliche Form und Lage sagen. Das Netz aber ist rein
geometrisch, alle seine Eigenschaften k(cid:246)nnen a priori angegeben
werden.
Gesetze, wie der Satz vom Grunde, etc., handeln vom Netz,
nicht von dem, was das Netz beschreibt.
6.36 Wenn es ein Kausalit(cid:228)tsgesetz g(cid:228)be, so k(cid:246)nnte es lauten: (cid:18)Es
gibt Naturgesetze(cid:16).
Aber freilich kann man das nicht sagen: es zeigt sich.
6.361 In der Ausdrucksweise Hertz’s k(cid:246)nnte man sagen: Nur ge-
setzm(cid:228)ssige Zusammenh(cid:228)nge sind denkbar.
6.3611 Wir k(cid:246)nnen keinen Vorgang mit dem (cid:18)Ablauf der Zeit(cid:16) verglei-
chen(cid:22)diesen gibt es nicht(cid:22), sondern nur mit einem anderen
Vorgang (etwa mit dem Gang des Chronometers).
Daher ist die Beschreibung des zeitlichen Verlaufs nur so
m(cid:246)glich, dass wir uns auf einen anderen Vorgang st(cid:252)tzen.
Ganz Analoges gilt f(cid:252)r den Raum. Wo man z. B. sagt, es
k(cid:246)nne keines von zwei Ereignissen (die sich gegenseitig aus-
schliessen) eintreten, weil keine Ursache vorhanden sei,
warum das eine eher als das andere eintreten solle, da han-
delt es sich in Wirklichkeit darum, dass man gar nicht eines
der beiden Ereignisse beschreiben kann, wenn nicht irgend eine
Asymmetrie vorhanden ist. Und wenn eine solche Asymmetrie
vorhanden ist, so k(cid:246)nnen wir diese als Ursache des Eintref-
fens des einen und Nicht-Eintre(cid:27)ens des anderen au(cid:27)assen.
6.36111 Das Kant’sche Problem von der rechten und linken Hand, die
man nicht zur Deckung bringen kann, besteht schon in der Ebe-
ne, ja im eindimensionalen Raum, wo die beiden kongruenten
Figuren a und b auch nicht zur Deckung gebracht werden k(cid:246)n-
nen, ohne aus diesem Raum herausbewegt zu werden. Rechte
und linke Hand sind tats(cid:228)chlich vollkommen kongruent. Und
dass man sie nicht zur Deckung bringen kann, hat damit nichts
zu tun.
Den rechten Handschuh k(cid:246)nnte man an die linke Hand
157

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
ziehen, wenn man ihn im vierdimensionalen Raum umdrehen
k(cid:246)nnte.
6.362 Was sich beschreiben l(cid:228)sst, das kann auch geschehen, und was
das Kausalit(cid:228)tsgesetz ausschliessen soll, das l(cid:228)sst sich auch
nicht beschreiben.
6.363 Der Vorgang der Induktion besteht darin, dass wir das ein-
fachste Gesetz annehmen, das mit unseren Erfahrungen in
Einklang zu bringen ist.
6.3631 Dieser Vorgang hat aber keine logische, sondern nur eine psy-
chologische Begr(cid:252)ndung.
Es ist klar, dass kein Grund vorhanden ist, zu glauben, es
werde nun auch wirklich der einfachste Fall eintreten.
6.36311 Dass die Sonne morgen aufgehen wird, ist eine Hypothese; und
das heisst: wir wissen nicht, ob sie aufgehen wird.
6.37 Einen Zwang, nach dem Eines geschehen m(cid:252)sste, weil etwas
anderes geschehen ist, gibt es nicht. Es gibt nur eine logi-
sche Notwendigkeit.
6.371 Der ganzen modernen Weltanschauung liegt die T(cid:228)uschung zu-
grunde, dass die sogenannten Naturgesetze die Erkl(cid:228)rungen der
Naturerscheinungen seien.
6.372 So bleiben sie bei den Naturgesetzen als bei etwas Unantast-
barem stehen, wie die (cid:228)lteren bei Gott und dem Schicksal.
Und sie haben ja beide Recht, und Unrecht. Die Alten
sind allerdings insofern klarer, als sie einen klaren Abschluss
anerkennen, w(cid:228)hrend es bei dem neuen System scheinen soll,
als sei alles erkl(cid:228)rt.
6.373 Die Welt ist unabh(cid:228)ngig von meinem Willen.
6.374 Auch wenn alles, was wir w(cid:252)nschen, gesch(cid:228)he, so w(cid:228)re dies
doch nur, sozusagen, eine Gnade des Schicksals, denn es ist
kein logischer Zusammenhang zwischen Willen und Welt,
der dies verb(cid:252)rgte, und den angenommenen physikalischen Zu-
sammenhang k(cid:246)nnten wir doch nicht selbst wieder wollen.
6.375 Wie es nur eine logische Notwendigkeit gibt, so gibt es auch
nur eine logische Unm(cid:246)glichkeit.
158

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
6.3751 Dass z. B. zwei Farben zugleich an einem Ort des Gesichtsfel-
des sind, ist unm(cid:246)glich und zwar logisch unm(cid:246)glich, denn es
ist durch die logische Struktur der Farbe ausgeschlossen.
Denken wir daran, wie sich dieser Widerspruch in der Phy-
sik darstellt: Ungef(cid:228)hr so, dass ein Teilchen nicht zu gleicher
Zeit zwei Geschwindigkeiten haben kann; das heisst, dass es
nicht zu gleicher Zeit an zwei Orten sein kann; das heisst, dass
Teilchen an verschiedenen Orten zu Einer Zeit nicht identisch
sein k(cid:246)nnen.
(Es ist klar, dass das logische Produkt zweier Elementar-
s(cid:228)tze weder eine Tautologie noch eine Kontradiktion sein kann.
Die Aussage, dass ein Punkt des Gesichtsfeldes zu gleicher Zeit
zwei verschiedene Farben hat, ist eine Kontradiktion.)
6.4 Alle S(cid:228)tze sind gleichwertig.
6.41 Der Sinn der Welt muss ausserhalb ihrer liegen. In der Welt
ist alles wie es ist und geschieht alles wie es geschieht; es gibt
in ihr keinen Wert(cid:22)und wenn es ihn g(cid:228)be, so h(cid:228)tte er keinen
Wert.
Wenn es einen Wert gibt, der Wert hat, so muss er ausser-
halb alles Geschehens und So-Seins liegen. Denn alles Gesche-
hen und So-Sein ist zuf(cid:228)llig.
Was es nicht-zuf(cid:228)llig macht, kann nicht in der Welt liegen,
denn sonst w(cid:228)re dies wieder zuf(cid:228)llig.
Es muss ausserhalb der Welt liegen.
6.42 Darum kann es auch keine S(cid:228)tze der Ethik geben.
S(cid:228)tze k(cid:246)nnen nichts H(cid:246)heres ausdr(cid:252)cken.
6.421 Es ist klar, dass sich die Ethik nicht aussprechen l(cid:228)sst.
Die Ethik ist transcendental.
(Ethik und Aesthetik sind Eins.)
6.422 Der erste Gedanke bei der Aufstellung eines ethischen Gesetzes
von der Form (cid:18)du sollst ....(cid:16) ist: Und was dann, wenn ich es
nicht tue? Es ist aber klar, dass die Ethik nichts mit Strafe
und Lohn im gew(cid:246)hnlichen Sinne zu tun hat. Also muss diese
Frage nach den Folgen einer Handlung belanglos sein.(cid:22)Zum
Mindesten d(cid:252)rfen diese Folgen nicht Ereignisse sein. Denn et-
was muss doch an jener Fragestellung richtig sein. Es muss
159

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
zwar eine Art von ethischem Lohn und ethischer Strafe geben,
aber diese m(cid:252)ssen in der Handlung selbst liegen.
(Und das ist auch klar, dass der Lohn etwas Angenehmes,
die Strafe etwas Unangenehmes sein muss.)
6.423 Vom Willen als dem Tr(cid:228)ger des Ethischen kann nicht gespro-
chen werden.
Und der Wille als Ph(cid:228)nomen interessiert nur die Psycholo-
gie.
6.43 Wenn das gute oder b(cid:246)se Wollen die Welt (cid:228)ndert, so kann es
nur die Grenzen der Welt (cid:228)ndern, nicht die Tatsachen; nicht
das, was durch die Sprache ausgedr(cid:252)ckt werden kann.
Kurz, die Welt muss dann dadurch (cid:252)berhaupt eine andere
werden. Sie muss sozusagen als Ganzes abnehmen oder zuneh-
men.
Die Welt des Gl(cid:252)cklichen ist eine andere als die des Un-
gl(cid:252)cklichen.
6.431 Wie auch beim Tod die Welt sich nicht (cid:228)ndert, sondern auf-
h(cid:246)rt.
6.4311 Der Tod ist kein Ereignis des Lebens. Den Tod erlebt man
nicht.
Wenn man unter Ewigkeit nicht unendliche Zeitdauer, son-
dern Unzeitlichkeit versteht, dann lebt der ewig, der in der
Gegenwart lebt.
Unser Leben ist ebenso endlos, wie unser Gesichtsfeld gren-
zenlos ist.
6.4312 Die zeitliche Unsterblichkeit der Seele des Menschen, das heisst
also ihr ewiges Fortleben auch nach dem Tode, ist nicht nur auf
keine Weise verb(cid:252)rgt, sondern vor allem leistet diese Annahme
gar nicht das, was man immer mit ihr erreichen wollte. Wird
denn dadurch ein R(cid:228)tsel gel(cid:246)st, dass ich ewig fortlebe? Ist
denn dieses ewige Leben dann nicht ebenso r(cid:228)tselhaft wie das
gegenw(cid:228)rtige? Die L(cid:246)sung des R(cid:228)tsels des Lebens in Raum und
Zeit liegt ausserhalb von Raum und Zeit.
(Nicht Probleme der Naturwissenschaft sind ja zu l(cid:246)sen.)
6.432 Wie die Welt ist, ist f(cid:252)r das H(cid:246)here vollkommen gleichg(cid:252)ltig.
Gott o(cid:27)enbart sich nicht in der Welt.
160

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
6.4321 Die Tatsachen geh(cid:246)ren alle nur zur Aufgabe, nicht zur L(cid:246)sung.
6.44 Nicht wie die Welt ist, ist das Mystische, sondern dass sie
ist.
6.45 Die Anschauung der Welt sub specie aeterni ist ihre Anschau-
ung als(cid:22)begrenztes(cid:22)Ganzes.
Das Gef(cid:252)hl der Welt als begrenztes Ganzes ist das mysti-
sche.
6.5 Zu einer Antwort, die man nicht aussprechen kann, kann man
auch die Frage nicht aussprechen.
Das R(cid:228)tsel gibt es nicht.
Wenn sich eine Frage (cid:252)berhaupt stellen l(cid:228)sst, so kann sie
auch beantwortet werden.
6.51 Skeptizismus ist nicht unwiderleglich, sondern o(cid:27)enbar unsin-
nig, wenn er bezweifeln will, wo nicht gefragt werden kann.
Denn Zweifel kann nur bestehen, wo eine Frage besteht;
eine Frage nur, wo eine Antwort besteht, und diese nur, wo
etwas gesagt werden kann.
6.52 Wir f(cid:252)hlen, dass selbst, wenn alle m(cid:246)glichen wissenschaft-
lichen Fragen beantwortet sind, unsere Lebensprobleme noch
gar nicht ber(cid:252)hrt sind. Freilich bleibt dann eben keine Frage
mehr; und eben dies ist die Antwort.
6.521 Die L(cid:246)sung des Problems des Lebens merkt man am Ver-
schwinden dieses Problems.
(Ist nicht dies der Grund, warum Menschen, denen der Sinn
des Lebens nach langen Zweifeln klar wurde, warum diese dann
nicht sagen konnten, worin dieser Sinn bestand.)
6.522 Es gibt allerdings Unaussprechliches. Dies zeigt sich, es ist
das Mystische.
6.53 Die richtige Methode der Philosophie w(cid:228)re eigentlich die:
Nichts zu sagen, als was sich sagen l(cid:228)sst, also S(cid:228)tze der
Naturwissenschaft(cid:22)also etwas, was mit Philosophie nichts
zu tun hat(cid:22), und dann immer, wenn ein anderer etwas
Metaphysisches sagen wollte, ihm nachzuweisen, dass er
gewissen Zeichen in seinen S(cid:228)tzen keine Bedeutung gegeben
hat. Diese Methode w(cid:228)re f(cid:252)r den anderen unbefriedigend(cid:22)er
161

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG
h(cid:228)tte nicht das Gef(cid:252)hl, dass wir ihn Philosophie lehrten(cid:22)aber
sie w(cid:228)re die einzig streng richtige.
6.54 Meine S(cid:228)tze erl(cid:228)utern dadurch, dass sie der, welcher mich ver-
steht, am Ende als unsinnig erkennt, wenn er durch sie(cid:22)auf
ihnen(cid:22)(cid:252)ber sie hinausgestiegen ist. (Er muss sozusagen die
Leiter wegwerfen, nachdem er auf ihr hinaufgestiegen ist.)
Er muss diese S(cid:228)tze (cid:252)berwinden, dann sieht er die Welt
richtig.
7 Wovon man nicht sprechen kann, dar(cid:252)ber muss man schweigen.
162

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE EDINBURGH PRESS,
9 AND 11 YOUNG STREET, EDINBURGH.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS ***
***** This file should be named 5740-pdf.pdf or 5740-pdf.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/4/5740/
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase ‘Project
Gutenberg’), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.
1.B. ‘Project Gutenberg’ is a registered trademark. It may only be

used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (‘the
Foundation’ or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase ‘Project Gutenberg’ appears, or with which the
phrase ‘Project Gutenberg’ is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the

copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase ‘Project
Gutenberg’ associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than ‘Plain Vanilla ASCII’ or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original ‘Plain
Vanilla ASCII’ or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:
* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in

Section 4, ‘Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation.’
* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by email) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.
* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.
* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain ‘Defects,’ such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the ‘Right
of Replacement or Refund’ described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a

written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you--‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.