GHOSTS 1 HAVE MET, AND SOME 

OTHERS 



GHOSTS THAT HAVE HAUNTED ME 

A FEW SPIRIT REMINISCENCES 

If we could only get used to the idea 
that ghosts are perfectly harmless creatures, 
who are powerless to affect our well-being 
unless we assist them by giving way to our 
fears, we should enjoy the supernatural ex- 
ceedingly, it seems to me. Coleridge, I think 
it was, was once asked by a lady if he believed 
in ghosts, and he replied, " No, madame ; I 
have seen too many of them." Which is 
my case exactly. I have seen so many 
horrid visitants from other worlds that they 
hardly affect me at all, so far as the mere 
inspiration of terror is concerned. On the 
other hand, they interest me hugely ; and 
while I must admit that I do experience all 
the purely physical sensations that come 
from horrific encounters of this nature, I 

A I 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

can truly add in my own behalf that men- 
tally I can rise above the physical impulse 
to run away, and, invariably standing my 
ground, 1 have gained much useful infor- 
mation concerning them. I am prepared 
to assert that if a thing with flashing green 
eyes, and clammy hands, and long, dripping 
strips of sea-weed in place of hair, should 
rise up out of the floor before me at this 
moment, 2 a.m., and nobody in the house 
but myself, with a fearful, nerve-destroying 
storm raging outside, I should without 
hesitation ask it to sit down and light a 
cigar and state its business — or, if it were 
of the female persuasion, to join me in a 
bottle of sarsaparilla — although every physi- 
cal manifestation of fear of which my poor 
body is capable would be present. I have 
had experiences in this line which, if I could 
get you to believe them, would convince you 
that I speak the truth. Knowing weak, 
suspicious human nature as I do, however, 
I do not hope ever to convince you — though 
it is none the less true — that on one occa- 
sion, in the spring of 1895, there was a spirit- 
ual manifestation in my library which nearly 



AND SOME OTHERS 

prostrated me physically, but which mental- 
ly I hugely enjoyed, because I was mentally 
strong enough to subdue my physical re- 
pugnance for the thing which suddenly and 
without any apparent reason materialized in 
my arm-chair. 

I'm going to tell you about it briefly, 
though I warn you in advance that you will 
find it a great strain upon your confidence 
in my veracity. It may even shatter that 
confidence beyond repair; but I cannot 
help that. I hold that it is a man's duty 
in this life to give to the world the benefit of 
his experience. All that he sees he should 
set down exactly as he sees it, and so sim- 
ply, withal, that to the dullest comprehen- 
sion the moral involved shall be perfectly 
obvious. If he is a painter, and an auburn- 
haired maiden appears to him to have blue 
hair, he should paint her hair blue, and just 
so long as he sticks by his principles and 
is true to himself, he need not bother about 
what you may think of him. So it is with 
me. My scheme of living is based upon 
being true to myself. You may class me 
with Baron Munchausen if you choose ; I 

3 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

shall not mind so long as I have the con- 
solation of feeling, deep down in my heart, 
that I am a true realist, and diverge not 
from the paths of truth as truth manifests 
itself to me. 

This intruder of whom I was just speak- 
ing, the one that took possession of my 
arm-chair in the spring of 1895, was about 
as horrible a spectre as I have ever had the 
pleasure to have haunt me. It was worse 
than grotesque. It grated on every nerve. 
Alongside of it the ordinary poster of the 
present day would seem to be as accurate 
in drawing as a bicycle map, and in its col- 
oring it simply shrieked with discord. 

If color had tones which struck the ear, 
instead of appealing to the eye, the thing 
would have deafened me. It was about 
midnight when the manifestation first took 
shape. My family had long before retired, 
and I had just finished smoking a cigar — 
which was one of a thousand which my wife 
had bought for me at a Monday sale at one 
of the big department stores in New York. 
I don't remember the brand, but that is 
just as well — it was not a cigar to be adver- 

4 



AND SOME OTHERS 

tised in a civilized piece of literature — but 
I do remember that they came in bundles 
of fifty, tied about with blue ribbon. The 
one I had been smoking tasted and burned 
as if it had been rolled by a Cuban insur- 
rectionist while fleeing from a Spanish regi- 
ment through a morass, gathering its com- 
ponent parts as he ran. It had two distinct 
merits, however. No man could possibly 
smoke too many of them, and they were 
economical, which is how the ever-helpful 
little madame came to get them for me, and 
I have no doubt they will some day prove 
very useful in removing insects from the 
rose-bushes. They cost $3 99 a thousand 
on five days a week, but at the Monday sale 
they were marked down to $1 75, which is 
why my wife, to whom I had recently read 
a little lecture on economy, purchased them 
for me. Upon the evening in question I 
had been at work on this cigar for about 
two hours, and had smoked one side of it 
three-quarters of the way down to the end, 
when I concluded that I had smoked enough 
— for one day — so I rose up to cast the 
other side into the fire, which was flicker- 

5 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

ing fitfully in my spacious fireplace. This 
done, I turned about, and there, fearful to 
see, sat this thing grinning at me from the 
depths of my chair. My hair not only stood 
on end, but tugged madly in an effort to get 
away. Four hairs — I can prove the state- 
ment if it be desired — did pull themselves 
loose from my scalp in their insane desire to 
rise above the terrors of the situation, and, 
flying upward, stuck like nails into the oak 
ceiling directly over my head, whence they 
had to be pulled the next morning with nip- 
pers by our hired man, who would no doubt 
testify to the* truth of the occurrence as I 
have asserted it if he were still living, which, 
unfortunately, he is not. Like most hired 
men, he was subject to attacks of lethargy, 
from one of which he died last summer. 
He sank into a rest about weed-time, last 
June, and lingered quietly along for two 
months, and after several futile efforts to 
wake him up, we finally disposed of him to 
our town crematory for experimental pur- 
poses. I am told he burned very actively, 
and I believe it, for to my certain knowl- 
edge he was very dry, and not so green as 

6 



AND SOME OTHERS 

some persons who had previously employed 
him affected to think. A cold chill came 
over me as my eye rested upon the horrid 
visitor and noted the greenish depths of his 
eyes and the claw-like formation of his fin- 
gers, and my flesh began to creep like an 
inch-worm. At one time I was conscious 
of eight separate corrugations on my back, 
and my arms goose-fieshed until they looked 
like one of those miniature plaster casts of 
the Alps which are so popular in Swiss sum- 
mer resorts; but mentally I was not dis- 
turbed at all. My repugnance was entirely 
physical, and, to come to th%.point at once, 
I calmly offered the spectre a cigar, which 
it accepted, and demanded a light. I gave 
it, nonchalantly lighting the match upon the 
goose-fleshing of my wrist. 

Now I admit that this was extraordinary 
and hardly credible, yet it happened exactly 
as I have set it down, and, furthermore, I 
enjoyed the experience. For three hours 
the thing and I conversed, and not once 
during that time did my hair stop pulling 
away at my scalp, or the repugnance cease 
to run in great rolling waves up and down 

7 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

my back. If I wished to deceive you, I 
might add that pin-feathers began to grow 
from the goose-flesh, but that would be a 
lie, and lying and I are not friends, and, 
furthermore, this paper is not written to 
amaze, but to instruct. 

Except for its personal appearance, this 
particular ghost was not very remarkable, 
and I do not at this time recall any of the 
details of our conversation beyond the point 
that my share of it was not particularly co- 
herent, because of the discomfort attendant 
upon the fearful hair-pulling process I was 
going through* I merely cite its coming to 
prove that, with all the outward visible signs 
of fear manifesting themselves in no uncer- 
tain manner, mentally I was cool enough 
to cope with the visitant, and sufficiently 
calm and at ease to light the match upon 
my wrist, perceiving for the first time, with 
an Edison-like ingenuity, one of the uses to 
which goose-flesh might be put, and knowing 
full well that if I tried to light it on the sole 
of my shoe I should have fallen to the 
ground, my knees being too shaky to ad- 
mit of my standing on one leg even for an 

8 



AND SOME OTHERS 

instant. Had I been mentally overcome, I 
should have tried to light the match on my 
foot, and fallen ignominiously to the floor 
then and there. 

There was another ghost that I recall to 
prove my point, who was of very great use 
to me in the summer immediately following 
the spring of which I have just told you. 
You will possibly remember how that the 
summer of 1895 had rather more than its fair 
share of heat, and that the lovely New 
Jersey town in which I have the happiness 
to dwell appeared to be the headquarters 
of the temperature. The thermometers of 
the nation really seemed to take orders 
from Beachdale, and properly enough, for 
our town is a born leader in respect to 
heat. Having no property to sell, I can- 
didly admit that Beachdale is not of an arc- 
tic nature in summer, except socially, per- 
haps. Socially, it is the coolest town in 
the State ; but we are at this moment 
not discussing cordiality, fraternal love, or 
the question raised by the Declaration of 
Independence as to whether all men are 
born equal. The warmth we have in hand 

9 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

is what the old lady called " Fahrenheat," 
and, from a thermometric point of view, 
Beachdale, if I may be a trifle slangy, as I 
sometimes am, has heat to burn. There 
are mitigations of this heat, it is true, but 
they generally come along in winter. 

I must claim, in behalf of my town, that 
never in all my experience have I known a 
summer so hot that it was not, sooner or 
later — by January, anyhow — followed by a 
cool spell. But in the summer of 1895 
even the real-estate agents confessed that 
the cold wave announced by the weather 
bureau at Washington summered else- 
where — in the tropics, perhaps, but not at 
Beachdale. One hardly dared take a bath 
in the morning for fear of being scald- 
ed by the fluid that flowed from the cold- 
water faucet — our reservoir is entirely un- 
protected by shade-trees, and in summer 
a favorite spot for young Walton s who like 
to catch bass already boiled — my neighbors 
and myself lived on cracked ice, ice-cream, 
and destructive cold drinks. I do not my- 
self mind hot weather in the daytime, but 

hot nights are killing. I can't sleep. I 

10 



AND SOME OTHERS 

toss about for hours, and then, for the sake 
of variety, I flop, but sleep cometh not. My 
debts double, and my income seems to sizzle 
away under the influence of a hot, sleepless 
night ; and it was just here that a certain 
awful thing saved me from the insanity 
which is a certain result of parboiled in- 
somnia. 

It was about the i6th of July, which, as I 
remember reading in an extra edition of the 
Evening Bun, got out to mention the fact, 
was the hottest i6th of July known in thirty- 
eight years. I had retired at half-past sev- 
en, after dining lightly upon a cold salmon 
and a gallon of iced tea — not because I was 
tired, but because I wanted to get down to 
first principles at once, and remove my 
clothing, and sort of spread myself over 
all the territory I could, which is a thing 
you can't do in a library, or even in a white- 
and-gold parlor. If man were constructed 
like a machine, as he really ought to be, 
to be strictly comfortable — a machine that 
could be taken apart like an eight -day 
clock — I should have taken myself apart, 

putting one section of myself on the roof, 

II 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

another part in the spare room, hanging a 
third on the clothes-line in the yard, and so 
on, leaving my head in the ice-box; but 
unfortunately we have to keep ourselves 
together in this life, hence I did the only 
thing one can do, and retired, and incident- 
ally spread myself over some freshly baked 
bedclothing. There was some relief from 
the heat, but not much. I had been roast- 
ing, and while my sensations were some- 
what like those which I imagine come to a 
planked shad when he first finds himself 
spread out over the plank, there was a miti- 
gation. My temperature fell off from 167 
to about 163, which is not quite enough to 
make a man absolutely content. Sudden- 
ly, however, I began to shiver. There was 
no breeze, but I began to shiver. 

" It is getting cooler," I thought, as the 
chill came on, and I rose and looked at the 
thermometer. It still registered the highest 
possible point, and the mercury was rebel- 
liously trying to break through the top of 
the glass tube and take a stroll on the roof. 

" That's queer," I said to myself. " It's 
as hot as ever, and yet I'm shivering. I 

12 



AND SOME OTHERS 

wonder if my goose is cooked? I've cer- 
tainly got a chill." 

I jumped back into bed and pulled the 
sheet up over me ; but still I shivered. 
Then I pulled the blanket up, but the chill 
continued. I couldn't seem to get warm 
again. Then came the counterpane, and 
finally I had to put on my bath -robe — a 
fuzzy woollen affair, which in midwinter I 
had sometimes found too warm for com- 
fort. Even then I was not sufficiently bun- 
dled up, so I called for an extra blanket, 
two afghans, and the hot-water bag. 

Everybody in the house thought I had 
gone mad, and I wondered myself if per- 
haps I hadn't, when all of a sudden I per- 
ceived, off in the corner, the Awful Thing, 
and perceiving it, I knew all. 

I was being haunted, and the physical 
repugnance of which I have spoken was 
on. The cold shiver, the invariable accom- 
paniment of the ghostly visitant, had come, 
and I assure you I never was so glad of 
anything in my life. It has always been 
said of me by my critics that I am raw ; I 
was afraid that after that night they would 

13 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

say I was half baked, and I would far rather 
be the one than the other; and it was the 
Awful Thing that saved me. Realizing 
this, I spoke to it gratefully. 

" You are a heaven-born gift on a night 
like this," said I, rising up and walking to 
its side. 

" I am glad to be of service to you," the 
Awful Thing replied, smiling at me so yel- 
lowly that I almost wished the author of the 
Blue- Button of Cowardice could have seen it. 

" It's very good of you," I put in. 

" Not at all," replied the Thing ; " you 
are the only man I know who doesn't think 
it necessary to prevaricate about ghosts 
every time he gets an order for a Christ- 
mas story. There have been more lies told 
about us than about any other class of 
things in existence, and we are getting a 
trifle tired of it. We may have lost our 
corporeal existence, but some of our sensi- 
tiveness still remains." 

" Well," said I, rising and lighting the 
gas-logs — for I was on the very verge of 
congealment — "I am sure I am pleased if 
you like my stories." 

14 



AND SOME OTHERS 

" Oh, as for that, I don't think much of 
them," said the Awful Thing, with a purple 
display of candor which amused me, al- 
though I cannot say that I relished it ; 
'* but you never lie about us. You are not 
at all interesting, but you are truthful, and 
we spooks hate libellers. Just because one 
happens to be a thing is no reason why 
writers should libel it, and that's why I have 
always respected you. We regard you as a 
sort of spook Boswell. You may be dull 
and stupid, but you tell the truth, and when 
I saw you in imminent danger of becoming 
a mere grease spot, owing to the fearful 
heat, I decided to help you through. That's 
why I'm here. Go to sleep now. I'll stay 
here and keep you shivering until daylight 
anyhow. I'd stay longer, but we are always 
laid at sunrise." 

" Like an egg," I said, sleepily. 

" Tutt !" said the ghost. " Go to sleep. 
If you talk I'll have to go." 

And so I dropped off to sleep as softly 
and as sweetly as a tired child. In the 
morning I awoke refreshed. The rest of 
my family were prostrated, but I was fresh. 

15 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

The Awful Thing was gone, and the room 
was warming up again ; and if it had not 
been for the tinkling ice in my water-pitch- 
er, I should have suspected it was all a 
dream. And so throughout the whole siz- 
zling summer the friendly spectre stood by 
me and kept me cool, and I haven't a doubt 
that it was because of his good offices in 
keeping me shivering on those fearful Au- 
gust nights that I survived the season, and 
came to my work in the autumn as fit as a 
fiddle — so fit, indeed, that I have not writ- 
ten a poem since that has not struck me as 
being the very best of its kind, and if I can 
find a publisher who will take the risk of 
putting those poems out, I shall unequivo- 
cally and without hesitation acknowledge, 
as I do here, my debt of gratitude to my 
friends in the spirit world. 

Manifestations of this nature, then, are 
harmful, as I have already observed, only 
when the person who is haunted yields to 
his physical impulses. Fought stubbornly 
inch by inch with the will, they can be sub- 
dued, and often they are a boon. I think I 

have proved both these points. It took me 

i6 



AND SOME OTHERS 

a long time to discover the facts, however, 
and my discovery came about in this way. 
It may perhaps interest you to know how 
I made it. I encountered at the English 
home of a wealthy friend at one time a 
"presence" of an insulting turn of mind. 
It was at my friend Jarley's little baronial 
hall, which he had rented from the Earl of 
Brokedale the year Mrs. Jarley was pre- 
sented at court. The Countess of Broke- 
dale's social influence went with the cha- 
teau for a slightly increased rental, which 
was why the Jarleys took it. I was invited 
to spend a month with them, not so much 
because Jarley is fond of me as because 
Mrs. Jarley had a sort of an idea that, as a 
writer, I might say something about their 
newly acquired glory in some American 
Sunday newspaper; and Jarley laughingly 
assigned to me the " haunted chamber," 
without at least one of which no baronial 
hall in the old country is considered worthy 
of the name. 

" It will interest you more than any oth- 
er," Jarley said ; " and if it has a ghost, I 

imagine you will be able to subdue him." 
B 17 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

I gladly accepted the hospitality of my 
friend, and was delighted at his consider- 
ation in giving me the haunted chamber, 
where I might pursue my investigations 
into the subject of phantoms undisturbed. 
Deserting London, then, for a time, I ran 
down to Brokedale Hall, and took up my 
abode there with a half-dozen other guests. 
Jarley, as usual since his sudden "gold- 
fall," as Wilkins called it, did everything 
with a lavish hand. I believe a man could 
have got diamonds on toast if he had chosen 
to ask for them. However, this is apart 
from my story. 

I had occupied the haunted chamber 
about two weeks before anything of im- 
portance occurred, and then it came — and 
a more unpleasant, ill-mannered spook nev- 
er floated in the ether. He materialized 
about 3 A.M. and was unpleasantly sulphur- 
ous to one's perceptions. He sat upon the 
divan in my room, holding his knees in 
his hands, leering and scowling upon 
me as though I were the intruder, and 
not he. 

" Who are you ?" I asked, excitedly, as 

iS 



AND SOME OTHERS 

in the dying light of the log fire he loomed 
grimly up before me. 

'* None of your business," he replied, in- 
solently, showing his teeth as he spoke. 
" On the other hand, who are you ? This 
is my room, and not yours, and it is I who 
have the right to question. If you have 
any business here, well and good. If not, 
you will oblige me by removing yourself, 
for your presence is offensive to me." 

" I am a guest in the house," I answered, 
restraining my impulse to throw the ink- 
stand at him for his impudence. " And 
this room has been set apart for my use by 
my host." 

" One of the servant's guests, I presume ?" 
he said, insultingly, his lividly lavender- 
like lip upcurling into a haughty sneer, 
which was maddening to a self-respecting 
worm like myself. 

I rose up from my bed, and picked up the 
poker to bat him over the head, but again 
I restrained myself. It will not do to quar- 
rel, I thought. I will be courteous if he is 
not, thus giving a dead Englishman a lesson 
which wouldn't hurt some of the living. 

19 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" No," I said, my voice tremulous with 
wrath — " no ; I am the guest of my friend 
Mr. Jarley, an American, who — " 

" Same thing," observed the intruder, with 
a yellow sneer. "Race of low -class ani- 
mals, those Americans — only fit for gentle- 
men's stables, you know." 

This was too much. A ghost may insult 
me with impunity, but when he tackles my 
people he must look out for himself. I 
sprang forward with an ejaculation of wrath, 
and with all my strength struck at him with 
the poker, which I still held in my hand. 
If he had been anything but a ghost, he 
would have been split vertically from top 
to toe ; but as it was, the poker passed 
harmlessly through his misty make-up, and 
rent a great gash two feet long in Jarley^s 
divan. The yellow sneer faded from his lips, 
and a maddening blue smile took its place. 

" Humph !" he observed, nonchalantly. 
" What a useless ebullition, and what a 
vulgar display of temper ! Really you are 
the most humorous insect I have yet en- 
countered. From what part of the States 

do you come? I am truly interested to 

20 



AND SOME OTHERS 

know in what kind of soil exotics of your 
peculiar kind are cultivated. Are you part 
of the fauna or the flora of your tropical 
States — or what ?" 

And then I realized the truth. There is 
no physical method of combating a ghost 
which can result in his discomfiture, so I 
resolved to try the intellectual. It was a 
mind-to-mind contest, and he was easy prey 
after I got going. I joined him in his 
blue smile, and began to talk about the 
English aristocracy ; for I doubted not, from 
the spectre's manner, that he was or had 
been one of that class. He had about him 
that haughty lack of manners which be- 
spoke the aristocrat. I waxed very elo- 
quent when, as I say, I got my mind really 
going. I spoke of kings and queens and 
their uses in no uncertain phrases, of divine 
right, of dukes, earls, marquises — of all the 
pompous establishments of British royalty 
and nobility — with that contemptuously hu- 
morous tolerance of a necessary and some- 
what amusing evil which we find in American 
comic papers. We had a battle royal for 
about one hour, and 1 must confess he was 

21 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

a foeman worthy of any man's steel, so long 
as I was reasonable in my arguments; but 
when I finally observed that it wouldn't be 
ten years before Barnum and Bailey's Great- 
est Show on Earth had the whole lot en- 
gaged for the New York circus season, 
stalking about the Madison Square Garden 
arena, with the Prince of Wales at the head 
beating a tomtom, he grew iridescent with 
wrath, and fled madly through the wainscot- 
ing of the room. It v/as purely a mental 
victory. All the physical possibilities of 
my being would have exhausted themselves 
futilely before him ; but when I turned upon 
him the resources of my fanc)% my imagi- 
nation unrestrained, and held back by no 
sense of responsibility, he was as a child in 
my hands, obstreperous but certain to be 
subdued. If it were not for Mrs. Jarley's 
wrath — which, I admit, she tried to con- 
ceal — over the damage to her divan, I should 
now look back upon that visitation as the 
most agreeable haunting experience of my 
life; at any rate, it was at that time that I 
first learned how to handle ghosts, and since 
that time- 1 have been able to overcome 

22 



AND SOME OTHERS 

them without trouble — save in one instance, 
with whicTi I shall close this chapter of my 
reminiscences, and which I give only to 
prove the necessity of observing strictly 
one point in dealing with spectres. 

It happened last Christmas, in my own 
home. I had provided as a little surprise 
for my wife a complete new solid silver 
service marked with her initials. The tree 
had been prepared for the children, and all 
had retired save myself. I had lingered 
later than the others to put the silver ser- 
vice under the tree, where its happy recipient 
would find it when she went to the tree with 
the little ones the next morning. It made 
a magnificent display : the two dozen of 
each kind of spoon, the forks, the knives, 
the coffee-pot, water-urn, and all ; the sal- 
vers, the vegetable-dishes, olive-forks, cheese- 
scoops, and other dazzling attributes of a 
complete service, not to go into details, pre- 
sented a fairly scintillating picture which 
would have made me gasp if I had not, at 
the moment when my own breath began to 
catch, heard another gasp in the corner im- 
mediately behind me. Turning about quick- 

23 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

ly to see whence it came, I observed a dark 
figure in the pale light of the m»on which 
streamed in through the window. 

** Who are you ?" I cried, starting back, 
the piiysical symptoms of a ghostly presence 
manifesting themselves as usual. 

** I am the ghost of one long gone before," 
was the reply, in sepulchral tones. 

I breathed a sigh of relief, for I had for 
a moment feared it was a burglar. 

" Oh 1" I said. " You gave me a start at 
first. I was afraid you were a material thing 
come to rob me." Then turning towards 
the tree, I observed, with a wave of the 
hand, " Fine lay out, eh ?" 

*' Beautiful," he said, hollowly. " Yet not 
so beautiful as things iVe seen in realms 
beyond your ken." 

And then he set about telling me of the 
beautiful gold and silver ware they used in 
the Elysian Fields, and I must confess Monte 
Cristo would have had a hard time, with 
Sindbad the Sailor to help, to surpass the 
picture of royal magnificence the spectre 
drew. I stood inthralled until, even as he 
was talking, the clock struck three, when he 

24 



AND SOME OTHERS 

rose up, and moving slowly across the floor, 
barely visible, murmured regretfully that he 
must be off, with which he faded away down 
the back stairs. I pulled my nerves, which 
were getting rather strained, together again, 
and went to bed. 

Next morning every bit of that silver-ware 
was gone; and, what is more, three weeks 
later I found the ghost's picture in the 
Rogues' Gallery in New York as that of 
the cleverest sneak-thief in the country. 

All of which, let me say to you, dear 
reader, in conclusion, proves that when you 
are dealing with ghosts you mustn't give up 
all your physical resources until you have 
definitely ascertained that the thing by which 
you are confronted, horrid or otherwise, is a 
ghost, and not an all too material rogue with 
a light step, and a commodious jute bag for 
plunder concealed beneath his coat. 

*' How to tell a ghost .^" you ask. 

Well, as an eminent master of fiction fre- 
quently observes in his writings, " that is 
another story," which I shall hope some 
day to tell for your instruction and my 
own aggrandizement. 

25 



THE MYSTERY OF MY GRAND- 
MOTHER'S HAIR SOFA 

It happened last Christmas Eve, and pre- 
cisely as I am about to set it forth. It has 
been said by critics that I am a romancer 
of the wildest sort, but that is where my 
critics are wrong. I grant that the expe- 
riences through which I have passed, some 
of which have contributed to the gray mat- 
ter in my hair, however little they may have 
augmented that within my cranium — ex- 
periences which I have from time to time 
set forth to the best of my poor abilities in 
the columns of such periodicals as I have 
at my mercy — have been of an order so 
excessively supernatural as to give my 
critics a basis for their aspersions ; but 
they do not know, as I do, that that basis 

is as uncertain as the shifting sands of 

26 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

the sea, inasmuch as in the setting forth of 
these episodes I have narrated them as 
faithfully as the most conscientious realist 
could wish, and am therefore myself a 
true and faithful follower of the realistic 
school. I cannot be blamed because these 
things happen to me.. If I sat down in my 
study to imagine the strange incidents to 
which I have in the past called attention, 
with no other object in view than to make 
my readers unwilling to retire for the night, 
to destroy the peace of mind of those who 
are good enough to purchase my literary 
wares, or to titillate till tense the nerve tis- 
sue of the timid who come to smile and 
who depart unstrung, then should I deserve 
the severest condemnation ; but these things 
I do not do. I have a mission in life which 
I hold as sacred as my good friend Mr. 
Howells holds his. Such phases of life as 
I see I put down faithfully, and if the Fates 
in their wisdom have chosen to make of me 
the Balzac of the Supernatural, the Shake- 
speare of the Midnight Visitation, while ele- 
vating Mr. Howells to the high office of the 
Fielding of Massachusetts and its adjacent 

27 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

States, the Smollett of Boston, and the 
Sterne of Altruria, I can only regret that 
the powers have dealt more graciously with 
him than with me, and walk my little way 
as gracefully as I know how. The slings 
and arrows of outrageous fortune I am pre- 
pared to suffer in all meekness of spirit; I 
accept them because it seems to me to be 
nobler in the mind so to do rather than by 
opposing to end them. And so to my story. 
I have prefaced it at such length for but 
one reason, and that is that I am aware 
that there will be those who will doubt the 
veracity of my tale, and I am anxious at 
the outset to impress upon all the unques- 
tioned fact that what I am about to tell is 
the plain, unvarnished truth, and, as I have 
already said, it happened last Christmas Eve. 
I regret to have to say so, for it sounds 
so much like the description given to other 
Christmas Eves by writers with a less con- 
scientious regard for the truth than I pos- 
sess, but the facts must be told, and I must 
therefore state that it was a wild and stormy 
night. The winds howled and moaned and 

made all sorts of curious noises, soughing 

28 



AND SOME OTHERS 

through the bare limbs of the trees, whist- 
ling through the chimneys, and, with reck- 
less disregard of my children's need of rest, 
slamming doors until my house seemed to 
be the centre of a bombardment of no mean 
order. It is also necessary to state that 
the snow, which had been falling all day, 
had clothed the lawns and house-tops in a 
dazzling drapery of white, and, not content 
with having done this to the satisfaction of 
all, was still falling, and, happily enough, 
as silently as usual. Were I the " wild 
romancer " that I have been called, I might 
have had the snow fall with a thunderous 
roar, but I cannot go to any such length. 
I love my fellow-beings, but there is a limit 
to my philanthropy, and I shall not have 
my snow fall noisily just to make a critic 
happy. I might do it to save his life, for 
I should hate to have a man die for the 
want of what I could give him with a stroke 
of my pen, and without any special effort, 
but until that emergency arises I shall not 
yield a jot in the manner of the falling of 
my snow. 

Occasionally a belated home-comer would 

29 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

pass my house, the sleigh-bells strung about 
the ample proportions of his steed jingling 
loud above the roaring of the winds. My 
family had retired, and I sat alone in the 
glow of the blazing log — a very satisfactory 
gas affair — on the hearth. The flashing 
jet flames cast the usual grotesque shadows 
about the room, and my mind had thereby 
been reduced to that sensitive state which 
had hitherto betokened the coming of a 
visitor from other realms — a fact which I 
greatly regretted, for I was in no mood to 
be haunted. My first impulse, when I rec- 
ognized the on-coming of that mental state 
which is evidenced by the goosing of one's 
flesh, if I may be allowed the expression, 
was to turn out the fire and go to bed. I 
have always found this the easiest method 
of ridding myself of unwelcome ghosts, and, 
conversely, I have observed that others who 
have been haunted unpleasantly have suf- 
fered in proportion to their failure to take 
what has always seemed to me to be the 
most natural course in the world — to hide 
their heads beneath the bed-covering. Bru- 
tus, when Caesar's ghost appeared beside 

30 



AND SOME OTHERS 

his couch, before the battle of Philippi, sat 
up and stared upon the horrid apparition, 
and suffered correspondingly, when it would 
have been much easier and more natural to 
put his head under his pillow, and so shut 
out the unpleasant spectacle. That is the 
course I have invariably pursued, and it has 
never failed me. The most luminous ghost 
man ever saw is utterly powerless to shine 
through a comfortably stuffed pillow, or the 
usual Christmas-time quota of woollen blan- 
kets. But upon this occasion I preferred 
to await developments. The real truth is 
that I was about written out in the matter 
of visitations, and needed a reinforcement 
of my uncanny vein, which, far from being 
varicose, had become sclerotic, so dry had 
it been pumped by the demands to which 
it had been subjected by a clamorous, mys- 
tery-loving public. I had, I may as well 
confess it, run out of ghosts, and had come 
down to the writing of tales full of the 
horror of suggestion, leaving my readers 
unsatisfied through my failure to describe 
in detail just what kind of looking thing it 
was that had so aroused their apprehension ; 

31 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

and one editor had gone so far as to reject 
my last ghost-story because I had worked 
him up to a fearful pitch of excitement, and 
left him there without any reasonable way 
out. I was face to face with a condition — 
which, briefly, was that hereafter that de- 
sirable market was closed to the products 
of my pen unless my contributions were ac- 
companied by a diagram which should make 
my mysteries so plain that a little child 
could understand how it all came to pass. 
Hence it was that, instead of following my 
own convenience and taking refuge in my 
spectre-proof couch, I stayed where I was. 
I had not long to wait. The dial in my fuel- 
meter below-stairs had hardly had time to 
register the consumption of three thousand 
feet of gas before the faint sound of a bell 
reached my straining ears — which, by-the- 
way, is an expression I profoundly hate, but 
must introduce because the public demands 
it, and a ghost-story without straining ears 
having therefore no chance of acceptance 
by a discriminating editor. I started from 
my chair and listened intently, but the ring- 
ing had stopped, and I settled back to the 

32 



AND SOME OTHERS 

delights of a nervous chill, when again the 
deathly silence of the night — the wind had 
quieted in time to allow me the use of this 
faithful, overworked phrase — was broken by 
the tintinnabulation of the bell. This time 
I recognized it as the electric bell operated 
by a push-button upon the right side of my 
front door. To rise and rush to the door 
was the work of a moment. It always is. 
In another instant I had flung it wide. 
This operation was singularly easy, consid- 
ering that it was but a narrow door, and 
width was the last thing it could ever be 
suspected of, however forcible the fling. 
However, I did as I have said, and gazed 
out into the inky blackness of the night. 
As I had suspected, there was no one there, 
and I was at once convinced that the dread- 
ed moment had come. I was certain that 
at the instant of my turning to re-enter my 
library I should see something which would 
make my brain throb madly and my pulses 
start. I did not therefore instantly turn, 
but let the wind blow the door to with a 
loud clatter, while I walked quickly into 
my dining-room and drained a glass of 
C 33 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

cooking-sherry to the dregs. I do not in- 
troduce the cooking - sherry here for the 
purpose of eliciting a laugh from the reader, 
but in order to be faithful to life as we live 
it. All our other sherry had been used by 
the queen of the kitchen for cooking pur- 
poses, and this was all we had left for the 
table. It is always so in real life, let critics 
say what they will. 

This done, I returned to the library, and 
sustained my first shock. The unexpected 
had happened. There was still no one 
there. Surely this ghost was an original, 
and I began to be interested. 

" Perhaps he is a modest ghost," I 
thought, " and is a little shy about mani- 
festing his presence. That, indeed, would 
be original, seeing how bold the spectres 
of commerce usually are, intruding them- 
selves always upon the privacy of those who 
are not at all minded to receive them." 

Confident that something would happen, 
and speedily at that, I sat down to wait, 
lighting a cigar for company ; for burning 
gas-logs are not as sociable as their hissing, 
spluttering originals, the genuine logs, in a 

34 



AND SOME OTHERS 

state of ignition. Several times I started 
up nervously, feeling as if there was some- 
thing standing behind me about to place a 
clammy hand upon my shoulder, and as 
many times did I resume my attitude of 
comfort, disappointed. Once I seemed to 
see a minute spirit floating in the air before 
me, but investigation showed that it was 
nothing more than the fanciful curling of 
the clouds of smoke I had blown from my 
lips. An hour passed and nothing oc- 
curred, save that my heart from throbbing 
took to leaping in a fashion which filled me 
with concern. A few minutes later, how- 
ever, I heard a strange sound at the win- 
dow, and my leaping heart stood still. The 
strain upon my tense nerves was becoming 
unbearable. 

" At last !" I whispered to myself, hoarse- 
ly, drawing a deep breath, and pushing with 
all my force into the soft upholstered back 
of my chair. Then I leaned forward and 
watched the window, momentarily expect- 
ing to see it raised by unseen hands ; but 
it never budged. Then I watched the glass 
anxiously, half hoping, half fearing to see 

35 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

something pass through it ; but nothing 
came, and I began to get irritable. 

I looked at my watch, and saw that it was 
half-past one o'clock. 

*' Hang you !*' I cried, " whatever you 
are, why don't you appear, and be done 
with it ? The idea of keeping a man up 
until this hour of the night !" 

Then I listened for a reply; but there 
was none. 

"What do you take me for?" I contin- 
ued, querulously. " Do you suppose I have 
nothing else to do but to wait upon your 
majesty's pleasure? Surely, with all the 
time you've taken to make your debut, you 
must be something of unusual horror." 

Again there was no answer, and I decided 
that petulance was of no avail. Some other 
tack was necessary, and I decided to appeal 
to his sympathies — granting that ghosts 
have sympathies to appeal to, and I have 
met some who were so human in this re- 
spect that I have found it hard to believe 
that they were truly ghosts. 

" I say, old chap," I said, as genially as 

I could, considering the situation — I was 

36 



AND SOME OTHERS 

nervous, and the amount of gas consumed 
by the logs was beginning to bring up vi- 
sions of bankruptcy before my eyes — " hurry 
up and begin your haunting — there's a good 
fellow. I'm a father — please remember that 
— and this is Christmas Eve. The children 
will be up in about three hours, and if youVe 
ever been a parent yourself you know what 
that means. I must have some rest, so 
come along and show yourself, like the good 
spectre you are, and let me go to bed." 

I think myself it was a very moving ad- 
dress, but it helped me not a jot. The 
thing must have had a heart of stone, for 
it never made answer. 

" What ?" said I, pretending to think it 
had spoken and I had not heard distinctly; 
but the visitant was not to be caught nap- 
ping, even though I had good reason to 
believe that he had fallen asleep. He, 
she, or it, whatever it was, maintained a 
silence as deep as it was aggravating. I 
smoked furiously on to restrain my grow- 
ing wrath. Then it occurred to me that 
the thing might have some pride, and I re- 
solved to work on that. 

37 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" Of course I should like to write you 
up," I said, with a sly wink at myself. " I 
imagine you*d attract a good deal of atten- 
tion in the literary world. Judging from 
the time it takes you to get ready, you ought 
to make a good magazine story — not one 
of those comic ghost-tales that can be dashed 
off in a minute, and ultimately get published 
in a book at the author's expense. You 
stir so little that, as things go by contra- 
ries, you'll make a stirring tale. You're 
long enough, I might say, for a three -vol- 
ume novel — but — ah — I can't do you un- 
less I see you. You must be seen to be 
appreciated. I can't imagine you, you know. 
Let's see, now, if I can guess what kind 
of a ghost you are. Um ! You must be 
terrifying in the extreme — you'd make a 
man shiver in mid -August in mid- Africa. 
Your eyes are unfathomably green. Your 
smile would drive the sanest mad. Your 
hands are cold and clammy as a — ah — as 
a hot-water bag four hours after." 

And so I went on for ten minutes, prais- 
ing him up to the skies, and ending up with 
a pathetic appeal that he should manifest 

38 



AND SOME OTHERS 

his presence. It may be that I puffed 
him up so that he burst, but, however that 
may be, he would not condescend to reply, 
and I grew angry in earnest. 

" Very well," I said, savagely, jumping 
up from my chair and turning off the gas- 
log. " Don't ! Nobody asked you to come 
in the first place, and nobody's going to 
complain if you sulk in your tent like Achil- 
les. I don't want to see you. I could fake 
up a better ghost than you are anyhow- -in 
fact, I fancy that's what's the matter with 
you. You know what a niiserable specimen 
you are — couldn't frighten a mouse if you 
were ten times as horrible. You're ashamed 
to show yourself — and I don't blame you. 
I'd be that way too if I were you." 

I walked half-way to the door, momenta- 
rily expecting to have him call me back ; but 
he didn't. I had to give him a parting shot. 

** You probably belong to a ghost union — 
don't you ? That's your secret ? Ordered 
out on strike, and won't do any haunting 
after sundown unless some other employer 
of unskilled ghosts pays his spooks skilled 
wages." 

39 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

I had half a notion that the word " spook'' 
would draw him out, for I have noticed that 
ghosts do not like to be called spooks any 
more than negroes like to be called "nig- 
gers." They consider it vulgar. He never 
yielded in his reserve, however, and after 
locking up I went to bed. 

For a time I could not sleep, and I began 
to wonder if I had been just, after all. Pos- 
sibly there was no spirit within miles of me. 
The symptoms were all there, but might 
not that have been due to my depressed 
condition — for it does depress a writer to 
have one of his best veins become sclero- 
tic — I asked myself, and finally, as I went 
off to sleep, I concluded that I had been 
in the wrong all through, and had imagined 
there was something there when there really 
was not. 

" Very likely the ringing of the bell was 
due to the wind," I said, as I dozed off. 
" Of course it would take a very heavy wind 
to blow the button in, but then — " and then 
I fell asleep, convinced that no ghost had 
ventured within a mile of me that night. 
But when morning came I was undeceived. 

40 



AND SOME OTHERS 

Something must have visited us that Christ- 
mas Eve, and something very terrible ; for 
while I was dressing for breakfast I heard 
my wife calling loudly from below. 

" Henry 1" she cried. " Please come down 
here at once." 

" I can't. I'm only half shaved," I an- 
swered. 

" Never mind that," she returned. " Come 
at once." 

So, with the lather on one cheek and a 
cut on the other, I went below. 

" What's the matter ?" I asked. 

" Look at that !" she said, pointing to my 
grandmother's hair-sofa, which stood in the 
hall just outside of my library door. 

It had been black when we last saw it, 
but as I looked I saw that a great change 
had come over it. 

// had turned white in a single night I 

Now I can't account for this strange in- 
cident, nor can any one else, and I do not 
intend to try. It is too awful a mystery for 
me to attempt to penetrate, but the sofa is 
there in proof of all that I have said con- 
cerning it, and any one who desires can call 

41 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

and see it at any time. It is not necessary 
for them to see me ; they need only ask to 
see the sofa, and it will be shown. 

We have had it removed from the hall 
to the white-and-gold parlor, for we cannot 
bear to have it stand in any of the rooms 
we use. 



THE MYSTERY OF BARNEY 
O'ROURKE 

A VERY irritating thing has happened. 
My hired man, a certain Barney O'Rourke, 
an American citizen of much political in- 
fluence, a good gardener, and, according to 
his lights, a gentleman, has got very much 
the best of me, and all because of certain 
effusions which from time to time have 
emanated from my pen. It is not often 
that one's literary chickens come home to 
roost in such a vengeful fashion as some 
of mine have recently done, and I have no 
doubt that as this story progresses he who 
reads will find much sympathy for me rising 
up in his breast. As the matter stands, I 
am torn with conflicting emotions. I am 
very fond of Barney, and I have always 
found him truthful hitherto, but exactly 
what to believe now I hardly know. 

43 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

The main thing to bring my present 
trouble upon me, I am forced to believe, 
is the fact that my house has been in the 
past, and may possibly still be, haunted. :i 
Why my house should be haunted at all ■ 
I do not know, for it has never been the 
scene of any tragedy that I am aware of. 
I built it myself, and it is paid for. So far 
as I am aware, nothing awful of a material j 
nature has ever happened within its walls, j 
and yet it appears to be, for the present j 
at any rate, a sort of club-house for incon- [ 
siderate if not strictly horrid things, which 
is a most unfair dispensation of the fates, 
for I have not deserved it. If I were in 
any sense a Bluebeard, and spent my days ' 

■ 

cutting ladies' throats as a pastime; if I 
had a pleasing habit of inviting friends up 
from town over Sunday, and dropping them 
into oubliettes connecting my library with 
dark, dank, and snaky subterranean dun- 
geons ; if guests who dine at my house 
came with a feeling that the chances were 
they would never return to their families 
alive — it might be different. I shouldn't 
and couldn't blame a house for being haunt- 

44 



AND SOME OTHERS 

ed if it were the dwelling-place of a blood- 
thirsty ruffian such as I have indicated, but 
that is just what it is not. It is not the 
home of a lover of fearful crimes. I would 
not walk ten feet for the pleasure of killing 
any man, no matter who he is. On the con- 
trary, I would walk twenty feet to avoid 
doing it, if the emergency should ever arise, 
aye, even if it were that iiend who sits next 
me at the opera and hums the opera through 
from beginning to end. There have been 
times, I must confess, when I have wished 
I might have had the oubliettes to which I 
have referred constructed beneath my li- 
brary and leading to the coal -bins or to 
some long-forgotten well, but that was two 
or three years ago, when I was in politics 
for a brief period, and delegations of will- 
ing and thirsty voters were daily and night- 
ly swarming in through every one of the 
sixteen doors on the ground -floor of my 
house, which my architect, in a riotous mo- 
ment, smuggled into the plans in the guise 
of " French windows." I shouldn't have 
minded then if the earth had opened up 
and swallowed my whole party, so long as 

45 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

I did not have to go with them, but under 
such provocation as I had I do not feel 
that my residence is justified in being haunt- 
ed after its present fashion because such a 
notion entered my mind. We cannot help 
our thoughts, much less our notions, and 
punishment for that which we cannot help 
is not in strict accord with latter-day ideas 
of justice. It may occur to some hypercriti- 
cal person to suggest that the English lan- 
guage has frequently been murdered in my 
den, and that it is its horrid corse which is 
playing havoc at my home, crying out to 
heaven and flaunting its bloody wounds in 
the face of my conscience, but I can pass 
such an aspersion as that by with contempt- 
uous silence, for even if it were true it could 
not be set down as wilful assassination on 
my part, since no sane person who needs a 
language as much as I do would ever in 
cold blood kill any one of the many that 
lie about us. Furthermore, the English lan- 
guage is not dead. It may not be met with 
often in these days, but it is still encoun- 
tered with sufificient frequency in the works 
of Henry James and Miss Libby to prove 

46 



AND SOME OTHERS 

that it still lives ; and I am told that one or 
two members of our consular service abroad 
can speak it — though as for this I cannot 
write with certainty, for I have never en- 
countered one of these exceptions to the 
general rule. 

The episode with which this narrative has 
to deal is interesting in some ways, though 
I doubt not some readers will prove scepti- 
cal as to its realism. There are suspicious 
minds in the world, and with these every 
man who writes of truth must reckon. To 
such I have only to say that it is my desire 
and intention to tell the truth as simply as 
it can be told by James, and as truthfully 
as Sylvanus Cobb ever wrote ! 

Now, then, the facts of my story are 
these : 

In the latter part of last July, expecting 
a meeting of friends at my house in con- 
nection with a question of the good govern- 
ment of the city in which I honestly try to 
pay my taxes, I ordered one hundred cigars 
to be delivered at my residence. I ordered 
several other things at the same time, but 
they have nothing whatever to do with this 

47 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

story, because they were all — every single 
bottle of them — consumed at the meeting; 
but of the cigars, about which the strange 
facts of my story cluster, at the close of the 
meeting a goodly two dozen remained. This 
is surprising, considering that there were 
quite six of us present, but it is true. Twenty- 
four by actual count remained when the 
last guest left me. The next morning I 
and my family took our departure for a 
month's rest in the mountains. In the 
hurry of leaving home, and the worry of 
looking after three children and four times 
as many trunks, I neglected to include the 
cigars in my impedimenta, leaving them in 
the opened box upon my library table. It 
was careless of me, no doubt, but it was 
an important incident, as the sequel shows. 
The incidents of the stay in the hills were 
commonplace, but during my absence from 
home strange things were going on there, 
as I learned upon my return. 

The place had been left in charge of Bar- 
ney O'Rourke, who, upon my arrival, as- 
sured me that everything was all right, and 
1 thanked and paid him. 

4S 



AND SOME OTHERS 

Wait a minute, Barney," I said, as he 
^^^ed to leave me ; " IVe got a cigar for 
j^U." I may mention incidentally that in 
^^^ past I had kept Barney on very good 
^^rms with his work by treating him in a 
Wendly, sociable way, but, to my great sur- 
prise, upon this occasion he declined ad- 
vances. 

His face flushed very red as he observed 
that he had given up smoking. 

" Well, wait a minute, anyhow," said I. 
" There are one or two things I want to 
speak to you about.'' And I went to the 
table to get a cigar for myself. 
The box was empty I 

Instantly the suspicion which has doubt- 
less flashed through the mind of the reader 
flashed through my own — Barney had been 
tempted, and had fallen. I recalled his 
blush, and on the moment realized that 
in all my vast experience with hired men 
in the past I had never seen one blush 
before. The case was clear. My cigars 
had gone to help Barney through the hot 
summer. 

" Well, I declare !" I cried, turning sud- 
D 49 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

denly upon him. " I left a lot of cigars 
here when I went away, Barney." 

" I know ye did, sorr," said Barney, who 
had now grown white and rigid. " I saw 
them meself, sorr. There was twinty-foor 
of 'em." 

" You counted them, eh .?" I asked, with 
an elevation of my eyebrows which to those 
who know me conveys the idea of suspicion. 

" I did, sorr. In your absence I was re- 
sponsible for everything here, and the morn- 
in' ye wint awaa I took a quick invintery, 
sorr, of the removables," he answered, fin- 
gering his cap nervously. " That's how it 
was, sorr, and thim twinty-foor segyars was 
lyin' there in the box forninst me eyes." 

** And how do you account for the re- 
moval of these removables, as you call them, 
Barney?" I asked, looking coldly at him. 
He saw he was under suspicion, and he 
winced, but pulled himself together in an 
instant. 

" I expected the question, sorr," he said, 
calmly, "and I have me answer ready. 
Thim segyars was shmoked, sorr." 

" Doubtless," said I, with an ill-suppressed 

50 



AND SOME OTHERS 

sneer. " And by whom ? Cats ?" I added, 
with a contemptuous shrug of my shoulders. 

His answer overpowered me, it was so 
simple, direct, and unexpected. 

** Shpooks," he replied, laconically. 

I gasped in astonishment, and sat down.i 
My knees simply collapsed under me, and 
I could no more have continued to stand 
up than fly. 

" What ?" I cried, as soon as I had re- 
covered sufficiently to gasp out the word. 

" Shpooks," replied Barney. ** Ut came 
about like this, sorr. It was the Froiday 
two wakes afther you left, I became un'asy 
loike along about nine o'clock in the ave- 
nin', and I thought I'd come around here 
and see if everything was sthraight. Me 
wife sez ut's foolish of me, sorr, and I sez 
maybe so, but I can't get ut out o' me head 
thot somet'ing's wrong. 

" ' Ye locked everyt'ing up safe whin ye 
left ?' sez she. 

" * I always does,' sez I. 

" * Thin ut's a phwhim,' sez she. 

" * No,' sez I. * Ut's a sinsation. If ut 
was a phwim, u t^'d be y ouse as would hov' 

51 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

it '; that's what I sez, sevarely loike, sorr, 
and out I shtarts. It was tin o'clock whin 
I got here. The noight was dark and blow- 
in' loike March, rainin' and t'underin' till 
ye couldn't hear yourself t'ink. 

" I walked down the walk, sorr, an' bar- 
rin' the t'under everything was quiet I 
troid the dures. All toight as a politician. 
Shtill, t'inks I, I'll go insoide. Quiet as a 
lamb ut was, sorr; but on a suddent, as I 
was about to go back home again, I shmelt 
shmoke!" 

" Fire ?'' I cried, excitedly. 

" I said shmoke, sorr," said Barney, whose 
calmness was now beautiful to look upon, 
he was so serenely confident of his position. 

** Doesn't smoke involve a fire ?" I de- 
manded. 

" Sometimes," said Barney. " I t'ought ye 
meant a conflagrashun, sorr. The shmoke 
I shmelt was segyars." 

*' Ah," I observed. " I am glad you are 
coming to the point. Go on. There is a 
difference." 

" There is thot," said Barney, pleasantly, 
he was getting along so swimmingly. " This 

52 



AND SOME OTHERS 

shmoke, as I say, was segyar shmoke, so I 
gropes me way cautious loike up the back 
sthairs and listens by the library dure. All 
quiet as a lamb. Thin, bold loike, I shteps 
into the room, and nearly drops wid the 
shcare I have on me in a minute. The 
room was dark as a b'aver hat, sorr, but in 
different shpots ranged round in the chairs 
was six little red balls of foire !" 

" Barney !" I cried. 

" Thrue, sorr," said he. " And tobacky 
shmoke rollin' out till you'd 'a' thought there 
was a foire in a segyar- store ! Ut queered 
me, sorr, for a minute, and me impulse is 
to run; but I gets me courage up, springs 
across the room, touches the electhric but- 
ton, an' bzt! every gas-jet on the flure 
loights up !" 

" That was rash, Barney," I put in, sar- 
castically. 

" It was in your intherest, sorr," said he, 
impressively. 

"And you saw what?" I queried, grow- 
ing very impatient. 

" What I hope niver to see again, sorr," 
said Barney, compressing his lips solemnly. 

53 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" Six impty chairs^ sorr, wid six segyars as 
hoigh up from the flure as a man's mout\ 
puffin' and a-blowin' out shmoke loike a 
chimbley ! An' ivery oncet in a whoile the 
segyars would go down kind of an' be 
tapped loike as if wid a finger of a shmoker, 
and the ashes would fall off onto the flure I" 

" Well ?" said I. ** Go on. What next ?" 

" I wanted to run awaa, sorr, but I shtood 
rutted to the shpot wid th' surproise I had 
on me, until foinally ivery segyar was burnt 
to a shtub and trun into the foireplace, 
where I found 'em the nixt mornin' when I 
came to clane up, provin' ut wasn't ony 
dhrame I'd been havin'." 

I arose from my chair and paced the room 
for two or three minutes, wondering what I 
could say. Of course the man was lying, I 
thought. Then I pulled myself together. 

"Barney," I said, severely, ** what's the 
use } Do you expect me to believe any 
such cock-and-bull story as that ?" 

"No, sorr," said he. "But thim's the 
facts." 

" Do you mean to say that this house of 
mine is haunted V I cried. 

54 



AND SOME OTHERS 

"I don't know," said Barney, quietly. 
« I didn't t'ink so before." 

"Before? Before what? When >" I asked. 

" Whin you was writin' shtories about ut, 
sorr," said Barney, respectfully. " You've 
had a black horse-hair sofy turn white in a 
single noight, sorr, for the soight of horror 
ut's witnessed. You've had the hair of your 
own head shtand on ind loike tinpenny 
nails at what you've seen here in this very 
room, yourself, sorr. You've had ghosts 
doin' all sorts of t'ings in the shtories you've 
been writin' for years, and yoiive always 
swore they was thrue, sorr. I didn't believe 
»em when I read 'em, but whin I see thim 
segyars bein' shmoked up before me eyes 
by invishible t'ings, I sez to meself, sez I, 
the boss ain't such a dommed loiar afther 
all. I've follyd your writin', sorr, very care- 
ful and close loike ; an I don't see how, 
afther the tales you've told about your own 
experiences right here, you can say con- 
sishtently that this wan o' mine ain't so !" 

" But why, Barney," I asked, to confuse 
him, " when a thing like this happened, 
didn't you write and tell me ?'' 

55 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

Barney chuckled as only one of his spe- 
cies can chuckle. 

"Wroite an' tell ye?" he cried. "Be 
gorry, sorr, if I could wroite at all at all, 
ut's not you oi'd be wroitin' that tale to, 
but to the edithor of the paper that you 
wroite for. A tale loike that is wort' tin 
dollars to any man, eshpecially if ut's thrue. 
But I niver learned the art !" 

And with that Barney left me over- 
whelmed. Subsequently I gave him the 
ten dollars which I think his story is worth, 
but I must confess that I am in a dilemma. 
After what I have said about my supernat- 
ural guests, I cannot discharge Barney for 
lying, but I'll be blest if I can quite believe 
that his story is accurate in every respect. 

If there should happen to be among the 
readers of this tale any who have made a 
sufficiently close study of the habits of hired 
men and ghosts to be able to shed any light 
upon the situation, nothing would please me 
more than to hear from them. 

I may add, in closing, that Barney has 
resumed smoking. 



THE EXORCISM THAT FAILED 

I — A JUBILEE EXPERIENCE 

It has happened again. I have been 
haunted once more, and this time by the 
most obnoxious spook I have ever had the 
bliss of meeting. He is homely, squat, and 
excessively vulgar in his dress and manner. 
I have met cockneys in my day, and some 
of the most offensive varieties at that, but 
this spook absolutely outcocknifies them all, 
and the worst of it is I can't seem to rid 
myself of him. He has pursued me like an 
avenging angel for quite six months, and 
every plan of exorcism that I have tried so 
far has failed, including the receipt given 
me by my friend Peters, who, next to my- 
self, knows more about ghosts that any man 
living. It was in London that I first en- 
countered the vulgar little creature who has 

57 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

made my life a sore trial ever since, and 
with whom I am still coping to the best of 
my powers. 

Starting out early in the morning of June 
21, last summer, to witness the pageant of 
her Majesty Queen Victoria's Diamond Ju- 
bilee, I secured a good place on the corner 
of Northumberland Avenue and Trafalgar 
Square. There were two rows of people 
ahead of me, but I did not mind that. Those 
directly before me were short, and I could 
easily see over their heads, and, further- 
more, I was protected from the police, who 
in London are the most dangerous people 
I have ever encountered, not having the 
genial ways of the Irish bobbies who keep 
the New York crowds smiling; who, when 
you are pushed into the line of march, mere- 
ly punch you in a ticklish spot with the end 
of their clubs, instead of smashing your 
hair down into your larynx with their sticks, 
as do their London prototypes. 

It was very comforting to me, having wit- 
nessed the pageant of 1887, when the Queen 
celebrated her fiftieth anniversary as a po- 
tentate, and thereby learned the English 

^8 



AND SOME OTHERS 

police system of dealing with crowds, to 
know that there were at least two rows of 
heads to be split open before my turn came, 
and I had formed the good resolution to 
depart as soon as the first row had been 
thus treated, whether I missed seeing the 
procession or not. 

I had not been long at my post when the 
crowds concentrating on the line of march, 
coming up the avenue from the Embank- 
ment, began to shove intolerably from the 
rear, and it was as much as I could do to 
keep my place, particularly in view of the 
fact that the undersized cockney who stood 
in front of me appeared to offer no resist- 
ance to the pressure of my waistcoat against 
his narrow little back. It seemed strange 
that it should be so, but I appeared, de- 
spite his presence, to have nothing of a ma- 
terial nature ahead of me, and I found 
myself bent at an angle of seventy-five de- 
grees, my feet firmly planted before me like 
those of a balky horse, restraining the on- 
ward tendency of the mob back of me. 

Strong as I am, however, and stubborn, 
I am not a stone wall ten feet thick at the 

59 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

base, and the pressure brought to bear upon 
my poor self was soon too great for my 
strength, and I gradually encroached upon 
my unresisting friend. He turned and hurled 
a few remarks at me that are not printable, 
yet he was of no more assistance in with- 
standing the pressure than a marrowfat pea 
well cooked would have been. 

"I'm sorry," I said, apologetically, "but 
I can't help it. If these policemen would 
run around to the rear and massacre some 
of the populace who are pushing me, I 
shouldn't have to shove you." 

" Well, all I've got to say," he retorted, 
" is that if you don't keep your carcass out 
of my ribs I'll haunt you to your dying day." 

" If you'd only put up a little backbone 
yourself you'd make it easier for me," I 
replied, quite hotly. " What are you, any^ 
how, a jelly-fish or an India-rubber man?" 
He hadn't time to answer, for just as I 
spoke an irresistible shove from the crowd 
pushed me slap up against the man in the 
front row, and I was appalled to find the 
little fellow between us bulging out on both 

sides of me, crushed longitudinally from top 

60 



AND SOME OTHERS 

to toe, so that he resembled a paper doll 
before the crease is removed from its mid- 
dle, three-quarters open. " Great heavens !" 
I muttered. " What have I struck .^" 

" L-lul-let me out !" he gasped. *' Don't 
you see you are squ-queezing my figure out 
of shape ? Get bub-back, blank it !" 

" I can't," I panted. " I'm sorry, but—" 

" Sorry be hanged !" he roared. " This 
is my place, you idiot — " 

This was too much for me, and in my 
inability to kick him with my foot I did it 
with my knee, and then, if I had not been 
excited, I should have learned the unhappy 
truth. My knee went straight through him 
and shoved the man ahead into the coat- 
tails of the bobbie in front. It was fortu- 
nate for me that it happened as it did, for 
the front-row man was wrathful enough to 
have struck me ; but the police took care 
of him ; and as he was carried away on a 
stretcher, the little jelly-fish came back into 
his normal proportions, like an inflated In- 
dia-rubber toy. 

"What the deuce are you, anyhow?" I 

cried, aghast at the spectacle. 

6i 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

*• YouMl find out before you are a yea^cr 
older !'' he wrathfuUy answered. " I'll sho\^^ 
you a shoving trick or two that you won't 
like, you blooming Yank !'' 

It made me excessively angry to be called 
a blooming Yank. I am a Yankee, and I 
have been known to bloom, but I can't 
stand having a low- class Britisher apply 
that term to me as if it were an opprobrious 
thing to be, so I tried once more to kick 
him with my knee. Again my knee passed 
through him, and this time took the police- 
man himself in the vicinity of his pistol- 
pocket. The irate officer turned quickly, 
raised his club, and struck viciously, not 
at the little creature, but at me. He didn't 
seem to see the jelly-fish. And then the 
horrid truth flashed across my mind. The 
thing in front of me was a ghost — a misera- 
ble relic of some bygone pageant, and visi- 
ble only to myself, who have an eye to that 
sort of thing. Luckily the bobbie missed 
his stroke, and as I apologized, telling him 
I had St. Vitus's dance and could not con- 
trol my unhappy leg, accompanying the 
apology with a half sovereign — both of 

62 



AND SOME OTHERS 

which were accepted — peace reigned, and 
[ shortly had the bliss of seeing the whole 
sovereign ride by — that is, I was told that 
:he lady behind the parasol, which obscured 
everything but her elbow, was her Majesty 
:he Queen. 

Nothing more of interest happened be- 
:ween this and the end of the procession, 
ilthough the little spook in front occasion- 
illy turned and paid me a compliment which 
vould have cost any material creature his 
ife. But that night something of impor- 
:ance did happen, and it has been going on 
ever since. The unlovely creature turned 
jp in my lodgings just as I was about to 
•etire, and talked in his rasping voice until 
ong after four o'clock. I ordered him out, 
md he declined to go. I struck at him, but 
t was like hitting smoke. 

" All right," said I, putting on my clothes. 
* If you won't get out, I will." 

" That's exactly what I intended you to 
io," he said. ** How do you like being 
jhoved, eh? Yesterday was the 21st of 
fune. I shall keep shoving you along, even 
IS you shoved me, for exactly one year." 

63 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" Humph !" I retorted. " You called me 
a blooming Yank yesterday. I am. I shall 
soon be out of your reach in the great and 
glorious United States.'* 

" Oh, as for that," he answered, calmly, 
" I can go to the United States. There 
are steamers in great plenty. I could even 
get myself blown across on a gale, if I 
wanted to — only gales are not always con- 
venient. Some of 'em don't go all the 
way through, and connections are hard 
to make. A gale I was riding on once 
stopped in mid -ocean, and I had to wait 
a week before another came along, and 
it landed me in Africa instead of at New 
York." 

" Got aboard the wrong gale, eh ?" said 
I, with a laugh. 

" Yes," he answered. 

" Didn't you drown ?" I cried, somewhat 
interested. 

"Idiot!" he retorted. "Drown? How 
could I ? You can't drown a ghost 1" 

*' See here," said I, " if you call me an 
idiot again, I'll— I'll— " 

" What ?" he put in, with a grin. " Now 

64 



AND SOME OTHERS 

just what will you do? You're clever, but 
Vtn a ghost P'' 

" You wait and see !" said I, rushing an- 
grily from the room. It was a veiy weak 
retort, and I frankly admit that I am 
ashamed of it, but it was the best I had at 
hand at the moment. My stock of repartee, 
like most men's vitality, is at its lowest 
ebb at four o'clock in the morning. 

For three or four hours I wandered aim- 
lessly about the city, and then returned to 
my room, and found it deserted; but in 
the course of my peregrinations I had ac- 
quired a most consuming appetite. Usually 
I eat very little breakfast, but this morning 
nothing short of a sixteen -course dinner 
could satisfy my ravening; so instead of 
eating my modest boiled ^gg^ I sought the 
Savoy, and at nine o'clock entered the 
breakfast-room of that highly favored cara- 
vansary. Imagine my delight, upon enter- 
ing, to see, sitting near one of the windows, 
my newly made acquaintances of the steam- 
er, the Travises of Boston, Miss Travis look- 
ing more beautiful than ever and quite as 

haughty, by whom I was invited to join 
E 65 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

them. I accepted with alacrity, and was 
just about to partake of a particularly nice 
melon when who should walk in but that 
vulgar little spectre, hat jauntily placed on 
one side of his head, check-patterned trou- 
sers loud enough to wake the dead, and a 
green plaid vest about his middle that 
would be an indictable offence even on an 
American golf links. 

"Thank Heaven they can't see the brute!" 
I muttered as he approached. 

*' Hullo, old chappie !" he cried, slapping 
me on my back. " Introduce me to your 
charming friends," and with this he gave a 
horrible lowborn smirk at Miss Travis, to 
whom, to my infinite sorrow, by some ac- 
cursed miracle, he appeared as plainly visi- 
ble as he was to me. 

" Really," said Mrs. Travis, turning cold- 
ly to me, " we — we can't, you know — we — 
Come, Eleanor. We will leave this gentle- 
man with his friend, and have our breakfast 
sent to our rooms." 

And with that they rose up and scornfully 
departed. The creature then sat down in Miss 
Travis's chair and began to devour her roll. 

66 



AND SOME OTHERS 

" See here," I cried, finally, " what the 
devil do you mean ?" 

" Shove number two," he replied, with 
his unholy smirk. " Very successful, eh ? 
Well, just you wait for number three. It 
will be what you Americans call a corker. 
By-bye." 

And with that he vanished, just in time 
to spare me the humiliation of shying a pot 
of coffee at his head. Of course my appe- 
tite vanished with him, and my main duty 
now seemed to be to seek out the Travises 
and explain ; so leaving the balance of my 
breakfast untasted, I sought the office, and 
sent my card up to Mrs. Travis. The re- 
sponse was immediate. 

" The loidy says she's gone out, sir, and 
ain't likely to be back," remarked the top- 
lofty buttons, upon his return. 

I was so maddened by this slight, and so 
thoroughly apprehensive of further trouble 
from the infernal shade, that I resolved with- 
out more ado to sneak out of England and 
back to America before the deadly blight- 
ing thing was aware of my intentions. I 
immediately left the Savoy, and sought the 

67 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

office of the Green Star Line, secured a 
room on the steamer sailing the next morn- 
ing — the Digestic — from Liverpool, and was 
about packing up my belongings, when /'/ 
turned up again. 

" Going away, eh ?" 

" Yes," I replied, shortly, and then I en- 
deavored to deceive him. " I've been in- 
vited down to Leamington to spend a week 
with my old friend Dr. Liverton." 

" Oh, indeed !" he observed. " Thanks 
for the address. I will not neglect you 
during your stay there. Be prepared for a 
shove that will turn your hair gray. Au 
revoiry 

And he vanished, muttering the address 
I had given him — *' Dr. Liverton, Leaming- 
ton — Dr. Liverton." To which he added, 
" I won't forget that^ not by a jugful." 

I chuckled softly to myself as he disap- 
peared. " He's clever, but — there are oth- 
ers," I said, delighted at the ease with which 
I had rid myself of him ; and then eating 
a hearty luncheon, I took the train to Liv- 
erpool, where next morning I embarked on 
the Digestic for New York. 

63 



AND SOME OTHERS 



II — AN UNHAPPY VOYAGE 

The sense of relief that swept over me 
when the great anchor of the Digestic came 
up from the unstrained quality of the Mer- 
sey, and I thought of the fact that shortly 
a vast ocean would roll between me and 
that fearful spook, was one of the most de- 
lightful emotions that it has ever been my 
good fortune to experience. Now all seem- 
ed serene, and I sought my cabin below- 
stairs, whistling gayly ; but, alas ! how fleet- 
ing is happiness, even to a whistler ! 

As I drew near to the room which I had 
fondly supposed was to be my own exclu- 
sively I heard profane remarks issuing there- 
from. There was condemnation of the soap ; 
there was perdition for the lighting appa- 
ratus ; there were maledictions upon the lo- 
cation of the port, and the bedding was 
excommunicate. 

"This is strange," said I to the steward. 

** I have engaged this room for the passage. 

I hear somebody in there." 

*' Not at all, sir," said he, opening the 

69 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

door ; " it is empty." And to him it un- 
doubtedly appeared to be so. 

" But," I cried," didn't you hear anything ?" 

" Yes, I did," he said, candidly ; " but I 
supposed you was a ventriloquist, sir, and 
was a-puttin' up of a game on me." 

Here the steward smiled, and I was too 
angry to retort. And then — Well, you 
have guessed it. He turned up — and more 
vulgar than ever. 

" Hullo !" he said, nonchalantly, fooling 
with a suit-case. " Going over ?" 

" Oh no !" I replied, sarcastic. "Just out 
for a swim. When we get off the Banks I'm 
going to jump overboard and ^im to the 
Azores on a wager." 

" How much ?" he asked. 

" Five bob," said I, feeling that he could 
not grasp a larger amount. 

" Humph !" he ejaculated. " I'd rather 
drive a cab — as I used to." 

"Ah ?" said I. " That's what you were, 
eh ? A cab-driver. Takes a mighty mind 
to be that, eh? Splendid intellectual ef- 
fort to drive a cab from the Reform Club 
to the Bank, eh V 

70 



AND SOME OTHERS 

I had hoped to wither him. 

" Oh, I don't know," he answered, suave- 
ly. " I'll tell you this, though : Td rather 
go from the Club to the Bank on my han- 
som with me holding the reins than try to 
do it with Mr. Gladstone or the Prince o' 
Wiles on the box." 

" Prince o' Wiles ?" I said, with a with- 
ering manner. 

" That's what I said," he retorted. " You 
would call him Prince of Whales, I suppose 
— like a Yank, a blooming Yank — because 
you think Britannia rules the waves." 

I had to laugh ; and then a plan of con- 
ciliation suggested itself. I would jolly 
him, as my political friends have it. 

" Have a drink ?" I asked. 

" No, thanks ; I don't indulge," he re- 
plied. " Let me offer you a cigar." 

I accepted, and he extracted a very fair- 
looking weed from his box, which he handed 
me. I tried to bite off the end, succeeding 
only in biting my tongue, whereat the pres- 
ence roared with laughter. 

" What's the joke now ?" I queried, irri- 
tated. 

71 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" You," he answered. " The idea of any 
one's being fool enough to try to bite off the 
end of a spook cigar strikes me as funny." 

From that moment all thought of con- 
ciliation vanished, and I resorted to abuse. 

" You are a low-born thing !" I shouted. 
" And if you don't get out of here right 
away I'll break every bone in your body." 

" Very well," he answered, coolly, scrib- 
bling on a pad close at hand. "There's 
the address." 

" What address ?" I asked. 

" Of the cemetery where those bones you 
are going to break are to be found. You 
go in by the side gate, and ask any of the 
grave-diggers where — " 

" You infernal scoundrel !" I shrieked, 
" this is my room. I have bought and 
paid for it, and I intend to have it. Do 
you hear ?" 

His response was merely the clapping of 
his hands together, and in a stage-whisper, 
leaning towards me, he said : 

" Bravo ! Bravo ! You are great. I think 
you could do Lear. Say those last words 
again, will you ?" 

72 



AND SOME OTHERS 

His calmness was too much for me, and 
I lost all control of myself. Picking up the 
water-bottle, I hurled it at him with all the 
force at my command. It crashed through 
him and struck the mirror over the wash- 
stand, and as the shattered glass fell with 
a loud noise to the floor the door to my 
state-room opened, and the captain of the 
ship, flanked by the room steward and the 
doctor, stood at the opening. 

" What's all this about ?" said the cap- 
tain, addressing me. 

" I have engaged this room for myself 
alone," I said, trembling in my rage, " and 
I object to that person's presence." Here 
I pointed at the intruder. 

" What person's presence ?" demanded 
the captain, looking at the spot where the 
haunting thing sat grinning indecently. 

" What person ?" I roared, forgetting the 
situation for the moment. " Why, him — 
it — whatever you choose to call it. He's 
settled down here, and has been black- 
guarding me for twenty minutes, and, damn 
it, captain, I won't stand it !" 

" It's a clear case," said the captain, with 

73 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

a sigh, turning and addressing the doctor. 
" Have you a strait-jacket ?" 

" Thank you, captain," said I, calming 
down. " It's what he ought to have, but 
it won't do any good. You see, he's not a 
material thing. He's buried in Kensal 
Green Cemetery, and so the strait -jacket 
won't help us." 

Here the doctor stepped into the room 
and took me gently by the arm. "Take 
off your clothes," he said, " and lie down. 
You need quiet." 

" I ?" I demanded, not as yet realizing 
my position. " Not by a long shot. Fire 
him out. That's all I ask." 

" Take off your clothes and get into that 
bed," repeated the doctor, peremptorily. 
Then he turned to the captain and asked 
him to detail two of his sailors to help him. 
*' He's going to be troublesome," he added, 
in a whisper. " Mad as a hatter." 

I hesitate, in fact decline, to go through 
the agony of what followed again by writing 
of it in detail. Suffice it to say that the 
doctor persisted in his order that I should 
undress and go to bed, and I, conscious of 

74 



AND SOME OTHERS 

the righteousness of my position, fought 
this determination, until, with the assist- 
ance of the steward and the two able-bodied 
seamen detailed by the captain at the doc- 
tor's request, I was forcibly unclad and 
thrown into the lower berth and strapped 
down. My wrath knew no bounds, and I 
spoke my mind as plainly as I knew how. 
It is a terrible thing to be sane, healthy, 
fond of deck-walking, full of life, and withal 
unjustly strapped to a lower berth below 
the water-line on a hot day because of a 
little beast of a cockney ghost, and I fairly 
howled my sentiments. 

On the second day from Liverpool two 
maiden ladies in the room next mine made 
representations to the captain which result- 
ed in my removal to the steerage. They 
couldn't consent, they said, to listen to the 
shrieks of the maniac in the adjoining 
room. 

And then, when I found myself lying on 
a cot in the steerage, still strapped down, 
who should appear but my little spectre. 

" Well," he said, sitting on the edge of 
the cot, " what do you think of it now, eh ? 

75 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

Ain't I a shover from Shoverville on the 
Push ?" 

*' It's all right," I said, contemptuously. 
"But I'll tell you one thing, Mr. Spook: 
when I die and have a ghost of my own, 
that ghost will seek you out, and, by thun- 
der, if it doesn't thrash the life out of you, 
I'll disown it !" 

It seemed to me that he paled a bit at 
this, but I was too tired to gloat over a 
little thing like that, so I closed my eyes 
and went to sleep. A few days later I was 
so calm and rational that the doctor released 
me, and for the remainder of my voyage I 
was as free as any other person on board, 
except that I found myself constantly under 
surveillance, and was of course much irri- 
tated by the notion that my spacious state- 
room was not only out of my reach, but 
probably in the undisputed possession of 
the cockney ghost. 

After seven days of ocean travel New 
York was reached, and I was allowed to 
step ashore without molestation. But my 
infernal friend turned up on the pier, and 

added injury to insult by declaring in my 

76 



AND SOME OTHERS 

behalf certain dutiable articles in my trunks, 
thereby costing me some dollars which I 
should much rather have saved. Still, after 
the incidents of the voyage, I thought it 
well to say nothing, and accepted the hard- 
ships of the experience in the hope that in 
the far distant future my spook would meet 
his and thrash the very death out of him. 

Well, things went on. The cockney spook 
left me to my own devices until November, 
when I had occasion to lecture at a certain 
college in the Northwest. I travelled from 
my home to the distant platform, went upon 
it, was introduced by the proper function- 
ary, and began my lecture. In the middle 
of the talk, who should appear in a vacant 
chair well down towards the stage but the 
cockney ghost, with a guffaw at a strong 
and not humorous point, which disconcerted 
me ! I broke down and left the platform, 
and in the small room at the side encoun- 
tered him. 

" Shove the fourth !" he cried, and van- 
ished. 

It was then that I consulted Peters as to 
how best to be rid of him. 

77 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" There is no use of talking about it," I 
said to Peters, "the man is ruining me. 
Socially with the Travises I am an outcast, 
and I have no doubt they will tell about it, 
and my ostracism will extend. On the Di- 
gestic my sanity is seriously questioned, and 
now for the first time in my life, before 
some two thousand people, I brez^k down 
in a public lecture which I have delivered 
dozens of times hitherto without a tremor. 
The thing cannot go on." 

*' I should say not," Peters answered. 
" Maybe I can help you to get rid of him, 
but Tm not positive about it; my new 
scheme isn't as yet perfected. Have you 
tried the fire-extinguisher treatment.^" 

I will say here, that Peters upon two oc- 
casions has completely annihilated unpleas- 
ant spectres by turning upon them the col- 
orless and odorless liquids whose chemical 
action is such that fire cannot live in their 
presence. 

" P'ire, the vital spark, is the essential 
element of all these chaps," said he," and if 
you can turn the nozzle of your extinguisher 
on that spook your ghost simply goes out" 



78 



AND SOME OTHERS 

" No, I haven't," I replied ; " but I will 
the first chance I get." And I left him, hope- 
ful if not confident of a successful exorcism. 

On my return home I got out two of the 
extinguishers which were left in my back 
hall for use in case of an emergency, and 
tested one of them on the lawn. I merely 
wished to ascertain if it would work with 
spirit, and it did ; it went ofT like a soda- 
water fountain loaded with dynamite, and 
I felt truly happy for the first time in many 
days. 

" The vulgar little beast would better 
keep away from me now," I laughed. But 
my mirth was short-lived. Whether or not 
the obnoxious little chap had overheard, or 
from some hidden coign had watched my 
test of the fire-extinguisher I don't know, 
but when he came to my den that night 
he was amply protected against the anni- 
hilating effects of the liquid by a flaring 
plaid mackintosh, with a toque for his head, 
and the minute I started the thing squirt- 
ing he turned his back and received the 
charge harmless on his shoulders. The 
only effect of the experiment was the drench- 

79 



AND SOME OTHERS 

tell you Tm mighty sorry about those ruined 
MSS. of yours. It is too bad that your 
whole day's work had to go for nothing." 

" I think so myself," I retorted, coldly. 
" It's rather late in the day for you to be 
sorry, though. If you'll show your sincer- 
ity by going away and never crossing my 
path again, I may believe in you." 

" Ah !" he said, " I've shown it in another 
way. Indeed I have. You know I have 
some conscience, though, to tell the truth, 
I haven't made much use of it. This time, 
however, as I considered the situation, a 
little voice rose up within me and said : 
' It's all right, old chap, to be rough on this 
person ; make him mad and shove him every 
which way ; but don't destroy his work. His 
work is what he lives by—' " 

" Yes," I interrupted, '' and after what I 
told you on the steamer about what I would 
do to you when we got on even terms, you 
are not anxious to have me die. I know 
just how you feel. No thing likes to con- 
template that paralysis that will surely fall 
upon you when my ghost begins to get in 
its fine work. I'm putting it in training now." 
F 8i 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" You poor droll mortal !" laughed the 
cockney. " You poor droll mortal ! As if 
I could ever be afraid of that ! What is the 
matter with my going into training myself? 
Two can train, you know — even three. You 
almost make me feel sorry I tried to remedy 
the loss of those MSS." 

Somehow or other a sense of some new 
misfortune came upon me. 

" What ?'' I said, nervously. 

** I say I'm almost sorry I tried to remedy 
the loss of those manuscripts. Composi- 
tion, particularly poetry, is devilish hard 
for me — I admit it — and when I think of 
how I toiled over my substitutes for your 
ruined stuff, and see how very ungrateful 
you are, I grudge the effort." 

" I don't understand you," I said, anx- 
iously. " What do you mean ?" 

*' I mean that I have written and sent 
out to the editors of the papers you write 
for a half a dozen poems and short stories." 

"What has all that got to do with me?" 
I demanded. 

"A great deal," he said. "You'll get 
the pay. I signed your name to V/«." 

82 



AND SOME OTHERS 

"Y — you — you — you — did what ?" I 
cried. 

" Signed your name to 'em. There was 
a sonnet to *A Coal Grab' — that was the 
longest of the lot. I think it will cover at 
least six magazine pages — " 

" But," I cried, " a sonnet never contains 
more than fourteen lines — you — fool !" 

" Oh yes, it does," he replied, calmly. 
** This one of yours had over four hundred. 
And then I wrote a three-page quatrain on 
* Immortality,' which, if I do say it, is the 
funniest thing I ever read. I sent that to 
the Weekly Methodist^ 

** Good Lord, good Lord, good Lord !" I 
moaned. " A three-page quatrain !" 

" Yes," he observed, calmly lighting one 
of his accursed cigars. "And you'll get 
all the credit." 

A ray of hope entered my soul, and it 
enabled me to laugh hysterically. " They'll 
know it isn't mine," said I. " They know 
my handwriting at the office of the Weekly . 
Methodist r 

" No doubt," said he, dashing all my 
hopes to the ground. " But — ah — to rem- 

83 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

edy that drawback I took pains to find out 
what type-writer you used, and I had my 
quatrain copied on one of the same make." 

" But the letter — the note with the manu- 
script ?" I put in. 

" Oh, I got over that very easily," he said. 
" I had that written also on the machine, 
on thin paper, and traced your signature at 
the bottom. It will be all right, my dear 
fellow. They'll never suspect.'' 

And then, looking at the spirit -watch 
which he carried in his spectral fob-pocket, 
he vanished, leaving me immersed in the 
deepest misery of my life. Not content 
with ruining me socially, and as a lecturer; 
not satisfied with destroying me mentally 
on the seas, he had now attacked me on my 
most vulnerable point, my literary aspira- 
tions. I could not rest until I had read his 
" three-page quatrain " on " Immortality." 
Vulgar as I knew him to be, I felt confident 
that over my name something had gone out 
which even in my least self-respecting moods 
I could not tolerate. The only comfort 
that came to me was that his verses and 
his type-writing and his tracings of my au- 

84 



AND SOME OTHERS 

tograph would be as spectral to others as 
to the eye not attuned to the seeing of 
ghosts. I was soon to be undeceived, how- 
ever, for the next morning's mail brought 
to my home a dozen packages from my best 
" consumers," containing the maudlin friv- 
olings of this — this — this— well, there is no 
polite word to describe him in any known 
tongue. I shall have to study the Aryan 
language — or Kipling — to find an epithet 
strong enough to apply to this especial case. 
Every point, every single detail, about these 
packages was convincing evidence of their 
contents having been of my own produc- 
tion. The return envelopes were marked at 
the upper corner with my name and address. 
The handwriting upon them was manifestly 
mine, although I never in my life penned 
those particular superscriptions. Within 
these envelopes were, I might say, pounds 
of MSS., apparently from my own type- 
writing machine, and signed in an autograph 
which would have deceived even myself. 

And the stuff ! 

Stuff is not the word — in fact, there is no 
word in any language, however primitive 

85 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

and impolite, that will describe accurately 
the substance of those pages. And with 
each came a letter from the editor of the 
periodical to which the tale or poem had 
been sent adinsing me io stop work for a 
w/tiUj and one suggfstcii the Keeley aire I 

Immediately I sat down and wrote to the 
various editors to whom these productions 
had been submitted, explaining all — and 
everv one of them came back to me un- 
opened, with the average statement that 
until I had rested a year they really hadn't 
the time to read what I wrote ; and my best 
friend among them, the editor of the Week- 
ly Methodist^ took the trouble to telegraph 
to my brother the recommendation that I 
should be looked after. And out of the 
mistaken kindness of his heart, he printed 
a personal in his next issue to the effect 
that his "valued contributor, Mr. Me, the 
public would regret to hear, was confined 
to his house by a sudden and severe attack 
of nervous prostration," following it up with 
an estimate of my career, which bore every 
]fnark of having been saved up to that time 
for use as an obituary. 

86 



AND SOME OTHERS 

And as I read the latter — the obituary — 
over, with tears in my eyes, what should I 
hear but the words, spoken at my back, clear- 
ly, but in unmistakable cockney accents, 

" Shove the fifth !" followed by uproari- 
ous laughter. I grabbed up the ink-bottle 
and threw it with all my strength back of 
me, and succeeded only in destroying the 
wall-paper. 

IV — THE FAILURE 

The destruction of the wall-paper, not to 
mention the wiping out in a moment of my 
means of livelihood, made of the fifth shove 
an intolerable nuisance. Controlling my- 
self with difficulty, I put on my hat and 
rushed to the telegraph office, whence I 
despatched a message, marked " Rush," 
to Peters. 

" For Heaven's sake, complete your ex- 
orcism and bring it here at once," I wired 
him. ** Answer collect." 

Peters by no means soothed my agitation 
by his immediate and extremely flippant 
response. 

" I don't know why )^u wish me to an- 

87 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

swer collect, but I suppose you do. So I 
answer as you request: Collect. What is 
it you are going to collect ? Your scattered 
faculties ?" he telegraphed. It was a mean 
sort of a telegram to send to a man in my 
unhappy state, and if he hadn't prepaid it 
I should never have forgiven him. I was 
mad enough when I received it, and a hot 
retort was about to go back, when the both- 
ersome spook turned up and drew my mind 
off to other things. 

" Well, what do you think of me ?" he 
said, ensconcing himself calmly on my di- 
van. *' Pretty successful shover myself, 
eh ?'' Then he turned his eye to the ink- 
spots on the wall. " Novel design in deco- 
ration, that. You ought to get employment 
in some wall-paper house. Given an acc^ 
rate aim and plenty of ink, you can't 
beaten for vigorous spatter-work." 

I pretended to ignore his presence, ai 
there was a short pause, after which 
began again : 

''Sulky, eh? Oh, well, I don't blai 
you. There's nothing in this world thj 
can so harrow up one's soul as impotei 

88 



"^^ 



AND SOME OTHERS 

wrath. I've heard of people bursting with 
it. I've had experiences in the art of irri- 
tation before this case. There was a fellow 
once hired my cab for an hour. Drove him 
all about London, and then he stopped in 
at a chop-house, leaving me outside. I 
waited and waited and waited, but he never 
came back. Left by the back door, you 
know. Clever trick, and for a while the 
laugh was on me ; but when I got to the 
point where I could haunt him, I did it to 
the Regent's taste. I found him three years 
after my demise, a.nd through the balance 
of his life pursued him everywhere with a 
phantom cab. If he went to church, I'd 
drive my spectre rig right down the middle 
aisle after him. If he called on a girl, there 
was the cab drawn up alongside of him in 
the parlor all the time, the horse stamping 
his foot and whinnying like all possessed. 
Of course no one else saw me or the horse 
or the cab, but he did; and. Lord! how mad 
he was, and how hopeless ! Finally, in a 
sudden surge of wrath at his impotence, 
he burst, just like a soap-bubble. It was 
most amusing. Even the horse laughed." 

So 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" Thanks for the story," said I, wishing 
to anger him by my nonchalance. '* I'll 
write it up." 

" Do," he said. " It will make a clever 
sixth shove for me. People say your fan- 
cies are too wild and extravagant even now. 
A story like that will finish you at once." 

*' Again, thanks," said I, very calmly. 
" This time for the hint. Acting on your 
advice, I won't write it up." 

" Don't," he retorted. " And be forever 
haunted with the idea. Either way, it suits 
me. 

And he vanished once more. 

The next morning Peters arrived at my 
house. 

" I've come," he said, as he entered my 
den. " The scheme is perfected at last, 
and possibly you can use it. You need 
help of some kind. I can see that, just by 
reading your telegram. You're nervous as 
a cat. How do you heat your house ?" 

" What's that got to do with it ?" I de- 
manded, irritably. ** You can't evaporate 
the little cuss." 

" Don't want to," Peters replied. ** That's 

QO 



AND SOME OTHERS 

been tried before, and it doesn't work. My 
scheme is a better one than that. Did you 
ever notice, while smoking in a house that 
is heated by a hot-air furnace, how, when a 
cloud of smoke gets caught in the current 
of air from the register, it is mauled and 
twisted until it gets free, or else is torn en- 
tirely apart ?" 

" Yes, I have," said I. " What of it ?" 

" Well, what's the matter with being ge- 
nial with your old cockney until he gets in 
the habit of coming here every night, and 
bide your time until, without his knowing 
it, you can turn a blast from the furnace on 
him that will simply rend him to pieces ?" 

" By Jove !'' I cried, delightedly. *' You 
are a genius, old chap." 

I rose and shook his hand until he re- 
monstrated. 

*' Save your energy for him," said he. 
** You'll need it. It won't be a pleasant 
spectacle to witness when, in his struggles 
to get away, he is gradually dismembered. 
It will be something like the drawing and 
quartering punishment of olden times." 

I shuddered as I thought of it, and for a 

91 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

moment was disposed to reject the plan, 
but my weakness left me as I thought of 
the ruin that stared me in the face. 

** Oh, I don't know," I said, shaking my 
head. " It will have its pleasurable side, 
however fearsome it may prove as a sight. 
This house is just fitted for the operation, 
particularly on warm days. I have seen 
times when the blasts of hot air from my 
furnace have blown one of my poems off my 
table across the room." 

"Great Scott!'' cried Peters. "What a 
cyclone of an air-box you must have I" 

P'ortunately the winter season was on, and 
we were able to test the capacity of the 
furnace, with gratifying results. A soap- 
bubble was blown, and allowed to float 
downward until the current was reached, 
and the novel shapes it took, as it was 
blown about the room in its struggles to 
escape before it burst, were truly wonder- 
ful. I doubted not for an instant, from 
what I then saw, that the little cad of a 
spectre that was ruining my life would soon 
meet his Nemesis. So convinced was I of 
the ultimate success of the plan that I could 

92 



AND SOME OTHERS 

hardly wait patiently for his coming. I be- 
came morbidly anxious for the horrid spec- 
tacle which I should witness as his body 
was torn apart and gradually annihilated 
by the relentless output of my furnace flues. 
To my great annoyance, it was two weeks 
before he turned up again, and I was be- 
ginning to fear that he had in some wise 
got wind of my intentions, and was turning 
my disappointment over his absence into 
the sixth of his series of " shoves." Final- 
ly, however, my anxiety was set at rest by 
his appearance on a night especially adapt- 
ed to a successful issue of the conspiracy. 
It was blowing great guns from the west, 
and the blasts of air, intermittent in their 
force, that came up through the flues were 
such that under other circumstances they 
would have annoyed me tremendously. Al- 
most everything in the line of the current 
that issued from the register and passed 
diagonally across the room to my fireplace, 
and so on up the chimney, was disturbed. 
The effect upon particles of paper and the 
fringes on my chairs was almost that of a 
pneumatic tube on substances placed within 

93 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

it, and on one or two occasions I was seri- 
ously apprehensive of the manner in which 
the flames on the hearth leaped upward 
into the sooty heights of my chimney flues. 

But when, as happened shortly, I sud- 
denly became conscious that my spectre 
cockney had materialized, all my fears for 
the safety of my house fled, and I surrep- 
titiously turned off the heat, so that once 
he got within range of the register I could 
turn it on again, and his annihilation would 
be as instantaneous as what my newspaper 
friends call an electrocution. And that was 
precisely where I made my mistake, al- 
though I must confess that what ensued 
when I got the nauseating creature within 
range was most delightful. 

" Didn't expect me back, eh ?'* he said, 
as he materialized in my library. " Missed 
me, I suppose, eh ?'' 

'* I've missed you like the deuce !'* I re- 
plied, cordially, holding out my hand as if 
welcoming him back, whereat he frowned 
suspiciously. " Now that I'm reconciled to 
your system, and know that there is no pos- 
sible escape for me, I don't seem to feel so 



AND SOME OTHERS 

badly. How have you been, and what have 
you been doing ?" 

" Bah !" he retorted. " What's up now ? 
You know mighty well you don't like me 
any better than you ever did. What funny 
little game are you trying to work on me 
now, eh ?" 

" Really, 'Arry," I replied, " you wrong 
me — and, by-the-way, excuse me for calling 
you 'Arry. It is the most appropriate name 
I can think of at the moment." 

" Call me what you blooming please," 
he answered. " But remember you can't 
soft-soap me into believing you like me. 
B-r-r-r-r!" he added, shivering. "It's 
beastly cold in here. What you been doing 
— storing ice ?" 

"Well — there's a fire burning over there 
in the fireplace," said I, anxious to get him 
before the open chimney- place ; for, by a 
natural law, that was directly in the line of 
the current. 

He looked at me suspiciously, and then 
at the fireplace with equal mistrust; then 
he shrugged his shoulders with a mocking 
laugh that jarred. 

95 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" Humph !" he said. "What's your scheme? 
(lot some patent explosive logs, full of chem- 
icals, to destroy me ?" 

I laughed. " How suspicious you are f 
I said. 

** Yes — I always am of suspicious charac- 
ters," he replied, planting himself immedi- 
ately in front of the register, desirous no 
doubt of acting directly contrary to my sug- 
gestion. 

My opportunity had come more easily 
than I expected. 

" There isn't any heat here," said he. 

" It's turned off. I'll turn it on for you," 
said I, scarcely able to contain myself with 
excitement — and I did. 

Well, as I say, the spectacle was pleasing, 
but it did not work as I had intended. He 
was caught in the full current, not in any 
of the destroying eddyings of the side upon 
which I had counted to twist his legs off 
and wring his neck. Like the soap-bubble 
it is true, he was blown into various odd 
fantastic shapes, such as crullers resolve 
themselves into when not properly looked 

after, but there was no dismembering of 

96 



AND SOME OTHERS 

his body. He struggled hard to free him- 
self, and such grotesque attitudes as his 
figure assumed I never saw even in one of 
Aubrey Beardsley's finest pictures ; and 
once, as his leg and right arm verged on 
the edge of one of the outside eddies, I 
hoped to see these members elongated like 
a piece of elastic until they snapped off ; 
but, with a superhuman struggle, he got 
them free, with the loss only of one of his 
fingers, by which time the current had blown 
him across the room and directly in front 
of my fender. To keep from going up the 
chimney, he tried to brace himself against 
this with his feet, but missing the rail, as 
helpless as a feather, he floated, toes first, 
into the fireplace, and thence, kicking, strug- 
gling, and swearing profanely, disappeared 
into the flue. 

It was too exciting a moment for me to 
laugh over my triumph, but shortly there 
came a nervous reaction which made me 
hysterical as I thought of his odd appear- 
ance; and then following close upon this 
came the dashing of my hopes. 

An infernal misplaced, uncalled-for back 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

gust, a diversion in which, thanks to an 
improper construction, my chimney fre- 
quently indulges, blew the unhappy creat- 
ure back into the room again, strained, 
sprained, panting, minus the finger he had 
lost, and so angry that he quivered all over. 

What his first words were I shall not re- 
peat. They fairly seethed out of his turned 
and twisted soul, hissing like the escape- 
valve of an ocean steamer, and his eyes, 
as they fell upon mine, actually burned 
me. 

"This settles it," he hissed, venomously. 
" I had intended letting you off with one 
more shove, but now, after your dastardly 
attempt to rend me apart with your damned 
hot-air furnace, I shall haunt you to your 
dying day ; I shall haunt you so terribly 
that years before your final exit from this 
world you will pray for death. As a shover 
you have found me equal to everything, but 
since you prefer twisting, twisting be it. 
You shall hear from me again !" 

He vanished, and, I must confess it, I 
threw myself upon my couch, weeping hot 
tears of despair. 

98 



AND SOME OTHERS 

Peters's scheme had failed, and I was in 
a far worse position than ever. Shoving I 
can stand, but the brief exhibition of twist- 
ing that I had had in watching his strug- 
gles with that awful cyclonic blast from 
below convinced me that there was some- 
thing in life even more to be dreaded than 
the shoving he and I had been indulg- 
ing in. 

But there was a postscript, and now all is 
well again, because — but let us reserve the 
wherefore of the postscript for another, con- 
cluding chapter. 

V — POSTSCRIPT 

So hopeless was my estate now become 
that, dreading more than ever that which 
the inscrutable future held for me, I sat 
down and framed an advertisement, which 
I contemplated putting in all the newspa- 
pers, weeklies, and monthly periodicals, of- 
fering a handsome reward for any suggest- 
ion which might result in ridding me of 
the cockney ghost. The inventive mind of 
man has been able to cope successfully witli 

99 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

rats and mice and other household pests. 
Why, then, should there not be somewhere 
in the world a person of sufficient ingenuity 
to cope with an obnoxious spirit ? If rat- 
dynamite and rough on June-bugs were pos- 
sible, why was it not likely that some as 
yet unknown person had turned his atten- 
tion to spectrology, and evolved something 
in the nature of rough on ghosts, spectre- 
melinite, or something else of an effective 
nature, I asked myself. It seemed reason- 
able to suppose that out of the millions of 
people in the world there were others than 
Peters and myself who had made a study 
of ghosts and methods of exorcising them, 
and if these persons could only be reached 
I might yet escape. Accordingly, I penned 
the advertisement about as follows : 



"l^ANTED, by a young and rising author, 
who is pursued by a vindictive spirit, 

A GHOST CURE. 

A liberal reward will be paid to any wizard, 
recognized or unrecognized, who will, before 
February i, 1898, send to me a detailed state- 
ment of a 

100 



AND SOME OTHERS 

I 

GUARANTEED METHOD 

of getting rid of 

SPOOKS. 

It is agreed that these communications shall 
be regarded as strictly confidential until such 
a time as through their medium the spirit is 
effectually 

LAID, 

after which time the cure will be exploited 

FREE OF CHARGE 
in the best advertising mediums of the day. 

To this I appended an assumed name 
and a temporary address, and was about to 
send it out, when my friend Wilkins, a mill- 
ionaire student of electricity, living in Flor- 
ida, invited me to spend my Christmas holi- 
days with him on Lake Worth. 

" IVe got a grand scheme," he wrote, 
" which I am going to test, and I'd like to 
have you present at the trial. Come down, 
if you can, and see my new electric sail- 
boat and all-around dynamic Lone Fisher- 
man." 

The idea took hold of me at once. In 
my nervous state the change of scene would 

lOI 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

do me good. Besides, Wilkins was a de- 
lightful companion. 

So, forgetting my woes for the moment, 
I packed my trunk and started South for 
Wilkins's Island. It was upon this trip that 
the vengeful spirit put in his first twist, for 
at Jacksonville I was awakened in the mid- 
dle of the night by a person, whom I took 
to be the conductor, who told me to change 
cars. This I did, and falling asleep in the 
car to which I had changed, waked up the 
next morning to find myself speeding across 
the peninsula instead of going downward 
towards the Keys, as I should have done, 
landing eventually at a small place called 
Homosassa, on the Gulf coast. 

Of course it was not the conductor of the 
first train who, under cover of the darkness, 
had led me astray, but the pursuing spirit, 
as I found out when, bewildered, I sat upon 
the platform of the station at Homosassa, 
wondering how the deuce I had got there. 
He turned up at that moment, and frankly 
gloated over the success of what he called 
shove the seventh, and twist the first. 

" Nice place, this," said he, with a nau- 

102 



AND SOME OTHERS 

seating smirk. " So close to Lake Worth — 
eh ? Only two days* ride on the choo-choo, 
if you make connections, and when chang- 
ing take the right trains/' 

I pretended not to see him, and began to 
whistle the intermezzo from "Cavalleria 
Rusticana," to show how little I cared. 

" Good plan, old chap," said he ; " but it 
won't work. I know you are put out, in spite 
of the tunefulness of your soul. But wait for 
my second twist. You'll wish you'd struck a 
cyclone instead when that turn comes." 

It was, as he suggested, at least two days 
before I was able to get to Wilkins at Lake 
Worth; but after I got there the sense of 
annoyance and the deep dejection into 
which I was plunged wore away, as well it 
might, for the test which I was invited to 
witness was most interesting. The dynamic 
Lone Fisherman was wonderful enough, but 
the electric sail -boat was a marvel. The 
former was very simple. It consisted of a 
reel operated by electricity, which, the mo- 
ment a blue-fish struck the skid at the end 
of the line, reeled the fish in, and flopped 

it into a basket as easily and as surely as 

103 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

you please ; but the principle of the sail- 
boat was new. 

" I don't need a breeze to sail anywhere," 
said Wilkins, as he hauled up the mainsail, 
which flapped idly in the still air. " For 
you see," he added, touching a button along- 
side of the tiller, " this button sets that big 
electric fan in the stern revolving, and the 
result is an artificial breeze which distends 
the sail, and there you are." 

It was even as he said. A huge fan with 
a dozen flanges in the stern began to revolve 
with wonderful rapidity; in an instant the 
sails bellied out, and the Horace J. ^ as his 
boat was named, was speeding through the 
waters before the breeze thus created in 
record-breaking fashion. 

"By Jove, Billie," I said, "this is a 
dandy!" 

"Isn't it!" cried an old familiar voice at 
my elbow. 

I turned as if stung. The spirit was with 
me again, prepared, I doubted not, for his 
second twist. I sprang from my seat, a sud- 
den inspiration flashing upon me, jumped 
back of the revolving fan, and turning the 

104 



AND SOME OTHERS 

full force of the wind it created upon my vin- 
dictive visitant, blew him fairly and squarely 
into the bulging sail. 

" There, blast your cockney eyes 1" I 
cried ; " take that." 

He tried to retort, but without avail. The 
wind that emanated from the fan fairly 
rammed his words back into his throat 
every time he opened his mouth to speak, 
and there he lay, flat against the canvas, 
fluttering like a leaf, powerless to escape. 

" Hot air doesn't affect you much, you 
transparent jackass !" I roared. " Let me 
see how a stiff nor'easter suits your style 
of beauty." 

I will not bore the reader with any further 
details of the Lake Worth experience. Suf- 
fice it to say that for five hours I kept the 
miserable thing a pneumatic prisoner in the 
concave surface of the sail. Try as he 
would, he could not escape, and finally, 
when Wilkins and I went ashore for the 
night, and the cockney ghost was released, 
he vanished, using unutterable language, 
and an idea came to me, putting which into 

105 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

operation, I at last secured immunity from 
his persecutions. 

Returning to New York three days later, 
I leased a small office in a fire-proof power 
building not far from Madison Square, fitted 
it up as if for my own use, and had placed 
in the concealment of a closet at its east- 
erly end the largest electric fan I could get 
It was ten feet in diameter, and was pro- 
vided with sixteen flanges. When it was 
in motion not a thing could withstand the 
blast that came from it. Tables, chairs, 
even a cut-glass inkstand weighing two 
pounds, were blown with a crash against 
the solid stone and iron construction back 
of the plaster of my walls. And then I 
awaited his coming. 

Suffice it to say that he came, sat down 
calmly and unsuspecting in the chair I had 
had made for his especial benefit, and then 
the moment he began to revile me I turned 
on the power, the fan began to revolve, the 
devastating wind rushed down upon him 
with a roar, pinned him to the wall like a 
butterfly on a cork, and he was at last my 
prisoner — and he is my prisoner still. For 

io6 



AND SOME OTHERS 

three weeks has that wheel been revolving 
night and day, and despite all his cunning 
he cannot creep beyond its blustering in- 
fluence, nor shall he ever creep therefrom 
while I have six hundred dollars per annum 
to pay for the rent and cost of power neces- 
sary to keep the fan going. 

Every once in a while I return and gloat 
over him ; and I can tell by the movement 
of his lips that he is trying to curse me, but 
he cannot, for, even as Wilkins's fan blew 
his words of remonstrance back into his 
throat, so does my wheel, twice as powerful, 
keep his torrent of invective from greeting 
my ear. 

I should be happy to prove the truth of 
all this by showing any curious -minded 
reader the spectacle which give* me so 
much joy, but I fear to do so lest the own- 
ers of the building, discovering the uses to 
which their office has been put, shall require 
me to vacate the premises. 

Of course he may ultimately escape, 
through some failure of the machine to 
operate, but it is guaranteed to run five 
years without a break, so for that period 

107 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

at least I am safe, and by that time it may 
be that he will be satisfied to call things 
square. I shall be satisfied if he is. 

Meanwhile, I devote my successful plan 
to the uses of all who may be troubled as 
I was, finding in their assumed gratitude a 
sufficient compensation for my ingenuity. 



THURLOW'S CHRISTMAS STORY 



(JBeing the Statement of Henry Thurlmv^ 
Author^ to George Currier^ Editor of the 
" Idler ^^ a Weekly Journal of Human 
Interest,) 

I HAVE always maintained, my dear Cur- 
rier, that if a man wishes to be considered 
sane, and has any particular regard for his 
reputation as a truth-teller, he would better 
keep silent as to the singular experiences 
that enter into his life. I have had many 
such experiences myself ; but I have rarely 
confided them in detail, or otherwise, to 
those about me, because I know that even 
the most trustful of my friends would re- 
gard them merely as the outcome of an im- 
agination unrestrained by conscience, or 
of a gradually weakening mind subject to 

109 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

hallucinations. I know them to be true, but 
until Mr. Edison or some other modern 
wizard has invented a search -light strong 
enough to lay bare the secrets of the mind 
and conscience of man, I cannot prove to 
others that they are not pure fabrications, 
or at least the conjurings of a diseased 
fancy. For instance, no man would be- 
lieve me if I were to state to him the plain 
and indisputable fact that one night last 
month, on my way up to bed shortly after 
midnight, having been neither smoking nor 
drinking, I saw confronting me upon the 
stairs, with the moonlight streaming through 
the windows back of me, lighting up its 
face, a figure in which I recognized my very 
self in every form and feature. I might 
describe the chill of terror that struck to 
the very marrow of my bones, and wellnigh 
forced me to stagger backward down the 
stairs, as I noticed in the face of this con- 
fronting figure every indication of all the 
bad qualities which I know myself to pos- 
sess, of every evil instinct which by no easy 
effort I have repressed heretofore, and real- 
ized that that tiling was, as far as I knew, 

no 



AND SOME OTHERS 

entirely independent of my true self, in 
which I hope at least the moral has made 
an honest fight against the immoral always. 
I might describe this chill, I say, as vividly 
as I felt it at that moment, but it would be 
of no use to do so, because, however real- 
istic it might prove as a bit of description, 
no man would believe that the incident 
really happened ; and yet it did happen as 
truly as I write, and it has happened a dozen 
times since, and I am certain that it will 
happen many times again, though I would 
give all that I possess to be assured that 
never again should that disquieting crea- 
tion of mind or matter, whichever it may 
be, cross my path. The experience has 
made me afraid almost to be alone, and I 
have found myself unconsciously and un- 
easily glancing at my face in mirrors, in 
the plate -glass of show-windows on the 
shopping streets of the city, fearful lest I 
should find some of those evil traits which 
I have struggled to keep under, and have 
kept under so far, cropping out there where 
ill the world, all my world, can see and 
wonder at, having known me always as a 

III 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

man of right doing and right feeling. Man} 
a time in the night the thought has come 
to me with prostrating force, what if thai 
thing were to be seen and recognized b) 
others, myself and yet not my whole self, 
my unworthy self unrestrained and yet rec- 
ognizable as Henry Thurlow. 

I have also kept silent as to that strange 
condition of affairs which has tortured me 
in my sleep for the past year and a half ; 
no one but myself has until this writing 
known that for that period of time I have 
had a continuous, logical dream-life ; a life 
so vivid and so dreadfully real to me that 
I have found myself at times wondering 
which of the two lives I was living and 
which I was dreaming ; a life in which that 
other wicked self has dominated, and forced 
me to a career of shame and horror ; a life 
which, being taken up every time I sleep 
where it ceased with the awakening from a 
previous sleep, has made me fear to close 
my eyes in forgetfulness when others are 
near at hand, lest, sleeping, I shall let fall 
some speech that, striking on their ears, 
shall lead them to believe that in secret 

112 



AND SOME OTHERS 

there is some wicked mystery connected 
with my life. It would be of no use for me 
to tell these things. It would merely serve 
to make my family and my friends uneasy 
about me if they were told in their awful 
detail, and so I have kept silent about them. 
To you alone, and now for the first time, 
have I hinted as to the troubles which have 
oppressed me for many days, and to you 
they are confided only because of the de- 
mand you have made that I explain to you 
the extraordinary complication in which the 
Christmas story sent you last week has in- 
volved me. You know that I am a man of 
dignity ; that I am not a school-boy and a 
lover of childish tricks ; and knowing that, 
your friendship, at least, should have re- 
strained your tongue and pen when, through 
the former, on Wednesday, you accused me 
of perpetrating a trifling, and to you exces- 
sively embarrassing, practical joke — a charge 
which, at the moment, I was too overcome 
to refute ; and through the latter, on Thurs- 
day, you reiterated the accusation, coupled 
with a demand for an explanation of my 
conduct satisfactory to yourself, or my im- 
H 113 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

mediate resignation from the staff of the 
Idler, To explain is difficult, for I am cer- 
tain that you will find the explanation too 
improbable for credence, but explain I must. 
The alternative, that of resigning from your 
staff, affects not only my own welfare, but 
that of my children, who must be provided 
for ; and if my post with you is taken from 
me, then are all resources gone. I have 
not the courage to face dismissal, for I have 
not sufficient confidence in my powers to 
please elsewhere to make me easy in my 
mind, or, if I could please elsewhere, the 
certainty of finding the immediate employ- 
ment of my talents which is necessary to 
me, in view of the at present overcrowded 
condition of the literary field. 

To explain, then, my seeming jest at your 
expense, hopeless as it appears to be, is my 
task ; and to do so a« completely as I can, 
let me go back to the very beginning. 

In August you informed me that you 
would expect me to provide, as I have here- 
tofore been in the habit of doing, a story 
for the Christmas issue of the Idler ; that 
a certain position in the make-up was re- 

114 



AND SOME OTHERS 

served for me, and that you had already 
taken steps to advertise the fact that the 
story would appear. I undertook the com- 
mission, and upon seven different occasions 
set about putting the narrative into shape. 
I found great difficulty, however, in doing 
so. For some reason or other I could not 
concentrate my mind upon the work. No 
sooner would I start in on one story than 
a better one, in my estimation, would sug- 
gest itself to me ; and all the labor expend- 
ed on the story already begun would be 
cast aside, and the new story set in motion. 
Ideas were plenty enough, but to put them 
properly upon paper seemed beyond my 
powers. One story, however, I did finish ; 
but after it had come back to me from my 
typewriter I read it, and was filled with 
consternation to discover that it was noth- 
ing more nor less than a mass of jumbled 
sentences, conveying no idea to the mind-r- 
a story which had seemed to me in the writ- 
ing to be coherent had returned to me as a 
mere bit of incoherence — formless, without 
ideas — a bit of raving. It was then that I 
went to you and told you, as you remember, 

"5 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

that I was worn out, and needed a month 
of absolute rest, which you granted. I left 
my work wholly, and went into the wilder- 
ness, where I could be entirely free from 
everything suggesting labor, and where no 
summons back to town could reach me. I 
fished and hunted. I slept ; and although, 
as I have already said, in my sleep I found 
myself leading a life that was not only not 
to my taste, but horrible to me in many par- 
ticulars, I was able at the end of my vaca- 
tion to come back to town greatly refreshed, 
and, as far as my feelings went, ready to 
undertake any amount of work. For two 
or three days after my return I was busy 
with other things. On the fourth day after 
my arrival you came to me, and said that 
the storv must be finished at the very latest 
by October 15th, and I assured you that 
you should have it by that time. That night 
I set about it. I mapped it out, incident 
by incident, and before starting up to bed 
had actually written some twelve or fifteen 
hundred words of the opening chapter— it 
was to be told in four chapters. When 1 
had gone thus far I experienced a slight 

116 



AND SOME OTHERS 

return of one of my nervous chills, and, on 
consulting my watch, discovered that it was 
after midnight, which was a sufficient ex- 
planation of my nervousness : I was merely 
tired. I arranged my manuscripts on my 
table so that I might easily take up the 
work the following morning. I locked up 
the windows and doors, turned out the lights, 
and proceeded upstairs to my room. 

// was then that I first came face to face 
with myself— that other self in which I rec- 
ognized^ developed to the full, a^ery bit of my 
capacity for an evil life. 

Conceive of the situation if you can. 
Imagine the horror of it, and then ask your- 
self if it was likely that when next morning 
came I could by any possibility bring my- 
self to my work-table in fit condition to pre- 
pare for you anything at all worthy of pub- 
lication in the Idler. I tried. I implore 
you to believe that I did not hold lightly 
the responsibilities of the commission you 
had intrusted to my hands. You must know 
that if any of your writers has a full appre- 
ciation of the difficulties which are strewn 
along the path of an editor, I, who have 

"7 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

myself had an editorial experience, have it, 
and so would not, in the nature of things, 
do anything to add to your troubles. You 
cannot but believe that I have made an 
honest effort to fulfil my promise to you. 
But it was useless, and for a week after that 
visitation was it useless for me to attempt 
the work. At the end of the week I felt 
better, and again I started in, and the story 
developed satisfactorily until — it came again. 
That figure which was my own figure, that 
face which was the evil counterpart of my 
own countenance, again rose up before me, 
and once more was I plunged into hope- 
lessness. 

Thus matters went on until the 14th day 
of October, when I received your peremp- 
tory message that the story must be forth- 
coming the following day. Needless to tell 
you that it was not forthcoming; but what 
I must tell you, since you do not know it, 
is that on the evening of the 15th day of 
October a strange thing happened to me, 
and in the narration of that incident, which 
I almost despair of your believing, lies my 
explanation of the discovery of October 

118 



AND SOME OTHERS 

1 6th, which has placed my position with 
you in peril. 

At half-past seven o'clock on the evening 
of October 15th I was sitting in my library 
trying to write. I was alone. My wife and 
children had gone away on a visit to Mas- 
sachusetts for a week. I had just finished 
my cigar, and had taken my pen in hand, 
when my front-door bell rang. Our maid, 
who is usually prompt in answering sum- 
monses of this nature, apparently did not 
hear the bell, for she did not respond to its 
clanging. Again the bell rang, and still 
did it remain unanswered, until finally, at 
the third ringing, I went to the door myself. 
On opening it I saw standing before me a 
man of, I should say, fifty odd years of age, 
tall, slender, pale-faced, and clad in sombre 
black. He was entirely unknown to me. 
I had never seen him before, but he had 
about him such an air of pleasantness and 
wholesomeness that I instinctively felt glad 
to see him, without knowing why or whence 
he had come. 

" Does Mr. Thurlow live here ?" he asked. 

You must excuse me for going into what 

119 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

may seem to you to be petty details, but by 
a perfectly circumstantial account of all that 
happened that evening alone can I hope 
to give a semblance of truth to my story, 
and that it must be truthful I realize as 
painfully as you do. 

" I am Mr. Thurlow," I replied. 

"Henry Thurlow, the author?" he said, 
with a surprised look upon his face. 

** Yes," said I ; and then, impelled by 
the strange appearance of surprise on the 
man's countenance, I added, " don't I look 
like an author ?" 

He laughed, and candidly admitted that 
I was not the kind of looking man he had 
expected to find from reading my books, 
and then he entered the house in response 
to my invitntfon that he do so. I ushered 
him into my library, and, after asking him 
to be seated, inquired as to his business 
with me. 

His answer was gratifying at least. He 

replied that he had been a reader of my 

writings for a number of years, and that for 

some time past he had had a great desire, 

not to say curiosity, to meet me and tell 

1 20 



AND SOME OTHERS 

me how much he had enjoyed certain of 
my stories. 

"I'm a great devourer of books, Mr. 
Thurlow," he said, " and I have taken the 
keenest delight in reading your verses and 
humorous sketches. I may go further, and 
say to you that you have helped me over 
many a hard place in my life by your work. 
At times when I have felt myself worn out 
with my business, or face to face with some 
knotty problem in my career, I have found 
much relief in picking up and reading your 
books at random. They have helped me to 
forget my weariness or my knotty problems 
for the time being ; and to-day, finding my- 
self in this town, I resolved to call upon 
you this evening and thank you for all that 
you have done for me." 

Thereupon we became involved in a gen- 
eral discussion of literary men and their 
works, and I found that my visitor certain- 
ly did have a pretty thorough knowledge of 
what has been produced by the writers of 
to-day. I was quite won over to him by his 
simplicity, as well as attracted to him by his 
kindly opinion of my own efforts, and I did 

121 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

my best to entertain him, showing him a 
few of my little literary treasures in the way 
of autograph letters, photographs, and pres- 
entation copies of well-known books from 
the authors themselves. From this we drift- 
ed naturally and easily into a talk on the 
methods of work adopted by literary men. 
He asked me many questions as to my own 
methods ; and when I had in a measure 
outlined to him the manner of life which I 
had adopted, telling him of my days at 
home, how little detail office -work I had, 
he seemed much interested with the pict- 
ure — indeed, I painted the picture of my 
daily routine in almost too perfect colors, 
for, when I had finished, he observed quiet- 
ly that I appeared to him to lead the ideal 
life, and added that he supposed I knew 
very little unhappiness. 

The remark recalled to me the dreadful 
reality, that through some perversity of fate 
I was doomed to visitations of an uncanny 
order which were practically destroying my 
usefulness in my profession and my sole 
financial resource. 

" Well," I replied, as my mind reverted 

122 



AND SOME OTHERS 

to the unpleasant predicament in which I 
found myself, " I can't say that I know 
little unhappiness. As a matter of fact, I 
know a great deal of that undesirable thing. 
At the present moment 1 am very much 
embarrassed through my absolute inability 
to fulfil a contract into which I have entered, 
and which should have been filled this 
morning. I was due to-day with a Christ- 
mas story. The presses are waiting for it, 
and I am utterly unable to write it.'* 

He appeared deeply concerned at the 
confession. I had hoped, indeed, that he 
might be sufficiently concerned to take his 
departure, that I might make one more ef- 
fort to write the promised story. His so- 
licitude, however, showed itself in another 
way. Instead of leaving me, he veniured 
the hope that he might aid me. 

"What kind of a story is it to be?" he 
asked. 

" Oh, the usual ghostly tale,*' I said, " with 
a dash of the Christmas flavor thrown in here 
and there to make it suitable to the season." 

" Ah," he observed. " And you find your 
vein worked out?" 

123 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

It was a direct and perhaps an imperti- 
nent question ; but I thought it best to 
answer it, and to answer it as well without 
giving him any clew as to the real facts. I 
could not very well take an entire stranger 
into my confidence, and describe to him 
the extraordinary encounters I was having 
with an uncanny other self. He would not 
have believed the truth, hence I told him 
an untruth, and assented to his proposition. 

" Yes," I replied, " the vein is worked 
out. I have written ghost stories for years 
now, serious and comic, and I am to-day 
at the end of my tether — compelled to move 
forward and yet held back." 

*' That accounts for it," he said, simply. 
" When I first saw you to-night at the door 
I could not believe that the author who had 
provided me with so much merriment could 
be so pale and worn and seemingly mirth- 
less. Pardon me, Mr. Thurlow, for my lack 
of consideration when I told you that you 
did not appear as I had expected to find 
you." 

I smiled my forgiveness, and he contin- 
ued : 

124 



AND SOME OTHERS 

" It may be," he said, with a show of 
hesitation — " it may be that I have come 
not altogether inopportunely. Perhaps I 
can help you." 

I smiled again. " I should be most grate- 
ful if you could," I said. 

" But you doubt my ability to do so ?" 
he put in. "Oh — well — yes — of course 
you do ; and why shouldn't you ? Never- 
theless, I have noticed this: At times when 
I have been baffled in my work a mere hint 
from another, from one who knew nothing 
of my work, has carried me on to a solution 
of my problem. I have read most of your 
writings, and I have thought over some of 
them many a time, and I have even had 
ideas for stories, which, in my own conceit, 
I have imagined were good enough for you, 
and I have wished that I possessed your 
facility with the pen that I might make of 
them myself what I thought you would 
make of them had they been ideas of your 
own." 

The old gentleman's pallid face reddened 
as he said this, and while I was hopeless as 
to anything of value resulting from his ideas, 

125 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

I could not resist the temptation to hear 
what he had to say further, his manner was 
so deliciously simple, and his desire to aid 
me so manifest. He rattled on with sug- 
gestions for a half -hour. Some of them 
were good, but none were new. Some were 
irresistibly funny, and did me good because 
they made me laugh, and I hadn't laughed 
naturally for a period so long that it made 
me shudder to think of it, fearing lest I 
should forget how to be mirthful. Finally 
I grew tired of his persistence, and, with a 
very ill - concealed impatience, told him 
plainly that I could do nothing with his 
suggestions, thanking him, however, for the 
spirit of kindliness which had prompted 
him to offer them. He appeared somewhat 
hurt, but immediately desisted, and when 
nine o'clock came he rose up to go. As he 
walked to the door he seemed to be under- 
going some mental struggle, to which, with 
a sudden resolve, he finally succumbed, for, 
after having picked up his hat and stick 
and donned his overcoat, he turned to me 
and said : 

" Mr. Thurlow, I don't want to offend 

126 



AND SOME OTHERS 

you. On the contrary, it is my dearest 
wish to assist you. You have helped me, 
as I have told you. Why may I not help 
you ?" 

" I assure you, sir — " I began, when he 
interrupted me. 

"One moment, please," he said, putting 
his hand into the inside pocket of his black 
coat and extracting from it an envelope 
addressed to me. "Let me finish : it is the 
whim of one who has an affection for you. 
For ten years I have secretly been at work 
myself on a story. It is a short one, but it 
has seemed good to me. I had a double 
object in seeking you out to-night. I wanted 
not only to see you, but to read my story 
to you. No one knows that I have written 
it ; I had intended it as a surprise to my — 
to my friends. I had hoped to have it pub- 
lished somewhere, and I had come here to 
seek your advice in the matter. It is a 
story which I have written and rewritten 
and rewritten time and time again in my 
leisure moments during the ten years past, 
as I have told you. It is not likely that I 
shall ever write another, I am proud of 

127 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

having done it, but I should be prouder yet 
if it — if it could in some way help you. I 
leave it with you, sir, to print or to destroy; 
and if you print it, to see it in type will be 
enough for me ; to see your name signed to 
it will be a matter of pride to me. No one 
will ever be the wiser, for, as I say, no one 
knows I have written it, and I promise you 
that no one shall know of it if you decide 
to do as I not only suggest but ask you to 
do. No one would believe me after it has 
appeared as yours^ even if I should forget 
my promise and claim it as my own. Take 
it. It is yours. You are entitled to it as a 
slight measure of repa3'ment for the debt 
of gratitude I owe you." 

He pressed the manuscript into my hands, 
and before I could reply had opened the 
door and disappeared into the darkness of 
the street. I rushed to the sidewalk and 
shouted out to him to return, but I might 
as well have saved my breath and spared 
the neighborhood, for there was no answer. 
Holding his story in my hand, I re-entered 
the house and walked back into my library, 
where, sitting and reflecting upon the cu- 

128 



AND SOME OTHERS 

rious interview, I realized for the first time 
bhat I was in entire ignorance as to my vis- 
itor's name and address. 

I opened the envelope hoping to find 
them, but they were not there. The en- 
i/elope contained merely a finely written 
manuscript of thirty odd pages, unsigned. 

And then I read the story. When I be- 
^an it was with a half-smile upon my lips, 
and with a feeling that I was wasting my 
time. The smile soon faded, however ; 
after reading the first paragraph there was 
no question of wasted time. The story was 
a masterpiece. It is needless to say to 
you that I am not a man of enthusiasms. 
It is difficult to arouse that emotion in my 
breast, but upon this occasion I yielded to 
a force too great for me to resist. I have 
read the tales of Hoffmann and of Poe, the 
wondrous romances of De La Motte Fouque, 
the unfortunately little-known tales of the 
lamented Fitz- James O'Brien, the weird 
tales of writers of all tongues have been 
thoroughly sifted by me in the course of 
my reading, and I say to you now that in 

the whole of my life I never read one story, 
I 129 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

one paragraph, one line, that could ap- 
proach in vivid delineation, in weirdness of 
conception, in anything, in any quality which 
goes to make up the truly great story, that 
story which came into my hands as I have 
told you. I read it once and was amazed. 
I read it a second time and was — tempted. 
It was mine. The writer himself had au- 
thorized me to treat it as if it were my own; 
had voluntarily sacrificed his own claim to 
its authorship that he might relieve me of 
my very pressing embarrassment. Not only 
this ; he had almost intimated that in put- 
ting my name to his work I should be doing 
him a favor. Why not do so, then, I asked 
myself ; and immediately my better self re- 
jected the idea as impossible. How could 
I put out as my own another man's work 
and retain my self-respect ? I resolved on 
another and better course — to send you the 
story in lieu of my own with a full state- 
ment of the circumstances under which it 
had come into my possession, when that 
demon rose up out of the floor at my side, 
this time more evil of aspect than before, 
more commanding in its manner. With a 

130 



AND SOME OTHERS 

groan I shrank back into the cushions of 
my chair, and by passing my hands over my 
eyes tried to obliterate forever the offend- 
ing sight ; but it was useless. The uncanny 
thing approached me, and as truly as I 
write sat upon the edge of my couch, where 
for the first time it addressed me. 

" Fool !" it said, " how can you hesitate ? 
Here is your position : you have made a 
contract which must be filled ; you are al- 
ready behind, and in a hopeless mental 
state. Even granting that between this and 
to-morrow morning you could put together 
the necessary number of words to fill the 
space allotted to you, what kind of a thing 
do you think that story would make ? It 
would be a mere raving like that other pre- 
cious effort of August. The public, if by 
some odd chance it ever reached them, 
would think your mind was utterly gone ; 
your reputation would go with that verdict. 
On the other hand, if you do not have the 
story ready by to-morrow, your hold on the 
lif/er will be destroyed. They have their 
announcements printed, and your name and 
portrait appear among those of the promi- 

131 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

nent contributors. Do you suppose the 
editor and publisher will look leniently 
upon your failure ?" 

" Considering my past record, yes," I 
replied. ** I have never yet broken a prom- 
ise to them." 

** Which is precisely the reason why they 
will be severe with you. You, who have 
been regarded as one of the few men who 
can do almost any kind of literary work at 
will — you, of whom it is said that your 
* brains are on tap ' — will they be lenient 
with you / Bah ! Can't you see that the 
very fact of your invariable readiness here- 
tofore is going to make your present un- 
readiness a thing incomprehensible ?" 

" Then what shall I do ?" I asked. " If 
I can't, I can't, that is all." 

** You can. There is the story in your 
hands. Think what it will do for you. It 
is one of the immortal stories — " 

*' You have read it, then ?" I asked. 

*' Haven't you ?" 

" Yes— but— " 

"It is the same," it said, with a leer and 
a contemptuous shrug. "You and I are 

132 



AND SOME OTHERS 

inseparable. Aren't you glad ?'* it added, 
with a laugh that grated on every fibre of 
my being. I was too overwhelmed to reply, 
and it resumed : " It is one of the immortal 
stories. We agree to that. Published over 
your name, your name will live. The stuff 
you write yourself will give you present 
glory ; but when you have been dead ten 
years people won't remember your name 
even — unless I get control of you, and in 
that case there is a very pretty though 
hardly a literary record in store for you.*' 

Again it laughed harshly, and I buried my 
face in the pillows of my couch, hoping to 
find relief there from this dreadful vision. 

" Curious," it said. " What you call your 
decent self doesn't dare look me in the eye ! 
What a mistake people make who say that 
the man who won't look you in the eye is 
not to be trusted ! As if mere brazenness 
were a sign of honesty ; really, the theory 
of decency is the most amusing thing in the 
world. But come, time is growing short. 
Take that story. The writer gave it to you. 
Begged you to use it as your own. It is 
yours. It will make your reputation, and 

133 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

save you with your publishers. How can 
you hesitate ?" 

** I shall not use it !" I cried, desper- 
ately. 

" You must — consider your children. 
Suppose you lose your connection with 
these publishers of yours ?" 

" But it would be a crime." 

" Not a bit of it. Whom do you rob ? 
A man who voluntarily came to you, and 
gave you that of which you rob him. Think 
of it as it is — and act, only act quickly. It 
is now midnight." 

The tempter rose up and walked to the 
other end of the room, whence, while he 
pretended to be looking over a few of my 
books and pictures, I was aware he was 
eying me closely, and gradually compel- 
ling me by sheer force of will to do a thing 
which I abhorred. And I — I struggled 
weakly against the temptation, but grad- 
ually, little by little, I yielded, and finally 
succumbed altogether. Springing to my 
feet, I rushed to the table, seized my pen, 
and signed my name to the story. 

" There !" I said. " It is done. I have 

134 



AND SOME OTHERS 

saved my position and made my reputation, 
and am now a thief !" 

"As well as a fool," said the other, calm- 
ly. " You don't mean to say you are going 
to send that manuscript in as it is ?" 

"Good Lord!" I cried. "What under 
heaven have you been trying to make me 
do for the last half hour ?" 

" Act like a sane being," said the demon. 
" If you send that manuscript to Currier 
he'll know in a minute it isn't yours. He 
knows you haven't an amanuensis, and that 
handwriting isn't yours. Copy it." 

" True !" I answered. " I haven't much 
of a mind for details to-night. I will do as 
you say." 

I did so. I got out my pad and pen and 
ink, and for three hours diligently applied 
myself to the task of copying the story. 
When it was finished I went over it care- 
fully, made a few minor corrections, signed 
it, put it in an envelope, addressed it to you, 
stamped it, and went out to the mail-box on 
the corner, where I dropped it into the slot, 
and returned home. When I had return- 
ed to my library my visitor was still there. 

135 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" Well," it said, " I wish you'd hurry and 
complete this affair. I am tired, and wish 
to go." 

" You can't go too soon to please me," 
said I, gathering up the original manuscripts 
of the story and preparing to put them away 
in my desk. 

"Probably not," it sneered. "I'll be 
glad to go too, but I can't go until that 
manuscript is destroyed. As long as it 
exists there is evidence of your having ap- 
propriated the work of another. Why, can't 
you see that ? Burn it !" 

" I can't see my way clear in crime !" I 
retorted. " It is not in my line." 

Nevertheless, realizing the value of his 
advice, I thrust the pages one by one into 
the blazing log fire, and watched them as 
they flared and flamed and grew to ashes. 
As the last page disappeared in the embers 
the demon vanished. I was alone, and 
throwing myself down for a moment's reflec- 
tion upon my couch, was soon lost in sleep. 

It was noon when I again opened my 
eyes, and, ten minutes after I awakened, 
your telegraphic summons reached me. 

136 



AND SOME OTHERS 

" Come down at once," was what you 
said, and I went ; and then came the ter- 
rible denouement, and yet a denouement which 
was pleasing to me since it relieved my con- 
science. You handed me the envelope con- 
taining the story. 

" Did you send that ?" was your ques- 
tion. 

" I did — last night, or rather early this 
morning. I mailed it^ about three o'clock," 
I replied. 

" I demand an explanation of your con- 
duct," said you. 

" Of what ?" I asked. 

" Look at your so-called story and see. 
If this is a practical joke, Thurlow, it's a 
damned poor one." 

I opened the envelope and took from it 
the sheets I had sent you — twenty-four of 
them. 

They were every one of them as blank as 
when they left the paper-mill ! 

You know the rest. You know that I 
tried to speak ; that my utterance failed 
me ; and that, finding myself unable at the 
time to control my emotions, I turned and 

137 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

rushed madly from the office, leaving the 
mystery unexplained. You know that you 
wrote demanding a satisfactory explanation 
of the situation or my resignation from 
your staff. 

This, Currier, is my explanation. It is 
all I have. It is absolute truth. I beg 
you to believe it, for if you do not, then is 
my condition a hopeless one. You will ask 
me perhaps for a resume of the story which 
I thought I had sent you. 

It is my crowning misfortune that upon 
that point my mind is an absolute blank. 
I cannot remember it in form or in sub- 
stance. I have racked my brains for some 
recollection of some small portion of it to 
help to make my explanation more credible, 
but, alas ! it will not come back to me. If 
I were dishonest I might fake up a story 
to suit the purpose, but I am not dishonest. 
I came near to doing an unworthy act; I 
did do an unworthy thing, but by some 
mysterious provision of fate my conscience 
is cleared of that. 

Be sympathetic, Currier, or, if you cannot, 
be lenient with me this time. Believe^ be- 

138 



THE DAMPMERE MYSTERY 

Dawson wished to be alone ; he had a 
tremendous bit of writing to do, which could 
not be done in New York, where his friends 
were constantly interrupting him, and that 
is why he had taken the little cottage at 
Dampmere for the early spring months. 
The cottage just suited him. It was re- 
mote from the village of Dampmere, and 
the rental was suspiciously reasonable ; he 
could have had a ninety-nine years' lease 
of it for nothing, had he chosen to ask for 
it, and would promise to keep the premises 
in repair ; but he was not aware of that fact 
when he made his arrangements with the 
agent. Indeed, there was a great deal that 
Dawson was not aware of when he took the 
place. If there hadn't been he never would 
have thought of going there, and this story 
would not have been written. 

140 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

It was late in March when, with his 
Chinese servant and his mastiff, he en- 
tered into possession and began the writ- 
ing of the story he had in mind. It was 
to be the effort of his life. People reading 
it would forget Thackeray and everybody 
else, and would, furthermore, never wish 
to see another book. It was to be the 
literature of all time — past and present and 
future; in it all previous work was to be 
forgotten, all future work was to be ren- 
dered unnecessary. 

For three weeks everything went smoothly 
enough, and the work upon the great story 
progressed to the author's satisfaction ; 
but as Easter approached something queer 
seemed to develop in the Dampmere cot- 
tage. It was undefinable, intangible, in- 
visible, but it was there. Dawson's hair 
would not stay down. When he rose up 
in the morning he would find every single 
hair on his head standing erect, and plaster 
it as he would with his brushes dipped in 
water, it could not be induced to lie down 
again. More inconvenient than this, his 
silken mustache was affected in the same 

141 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

way, so that instead of drooping in a soft 
fascinating curl over his lip, it also rose up 
like a row of bayonets and lay flat against 
either side of his nose ; and with this sin- 
gular hirsute affliction there came into Daw- 
son's heart a feeling of apprehension over 
something, he knew not what, that speed- 
ily developed into an uncontrollable terror 
that pervaded his whole being, and more 
thoroughly destroyed his ability to work 
upon his immortal story than ten inconsid- 
erate New York friends dropping in on him 
in his busy hours could possibly have done. 
" What the dickens is the matter with 
me ?" he said to himself, as for the sixteenth 
time he brushed his rebellious locks. "What 
has come over my hair ? And what under 
the sun am I afraid of ? The idea of a man 
of my size looking under the bed every 
night for — for something — burglar, spook, 
or what I don't know. Waking at mid- 
night shivering with fear, walking in the 
broad light of day filled with terror; by 
Jove ! I almost wish I was Chung Lee 
down in the kitchen, who goes about his 
business undisturbed." 

142 



AND SOME OTHERS 

Having said this, Dawson looked about 
him nervously. If he had expected a dag- 
ger to be plunged into his back by an un- 
seen foe he could not have looked around 
more anxiously ; and then he fled, actually 
fled in terror into the kitchen, where Chung 
Lee was preparing his dinner. Chung was 
only a Chinaman, but he was a living creat- 
ure, and Dawson was afraid to be alone. 

" Well, Chung," he said, as affably as he 
could, " this is a pleasant change from New 
York, eh ?'' 

" Plutty good," replied Chung, with a va- 
cant stare at the pantry door. " Me likes 
Noo Lork allee same. Dampeemere kind 
of flunny. Mister Dawson." 

" Funny, Chung ?" queried Dawson, ob- 
serving for the first time that the China- 
man's queue stood up as straight as a gar- 
den stake, and almost scraped the ceiling 
as its owner moved about. " Funny ?" 

" Yeppee, flunny," returned Chung, with 
a shiver. *' Me no likee. Me flightened." 

" Oh, come !" said Dawson, with an af- 
fected lightness. " What are you afraid 
of?" 

143 



> 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

"Slumting," said Chung. "Do* \cnow 
what. Go to bled ; no sleepee ; pigtail no 
stay down ; heart go thump allee night/' 

** By Jove !'' thought Dawson ; " he's got 
it too !" 

" Evlyting flunny here," resumed Chung. 
" Jack he no likee too." 

Jack was the mastiff. 

** What's the matter with Jack ?" queried 
Dawson. " You don't mean to say Jack's 
afraid ?" 

"Do' know if he 'flaid," said Chung. 
" He growl most time." 

Clearly there was no comfort for Dawson 
here. To rid him of his fears it was evi- 
dent that Chung could be of no assistance, 
and Chung's feeling that even Jack was af- 
fected by the uncanny something was by no 
means reassuring. Dawson went out into 
the yard and whistled for the dog, and in a 
moment the magnificent animal came bound- 
ing up. Dawson patted him on the back, 
but Jack, instead of rejoicing as was his 
wont over this token of his master's affec- 
tion, gave a yelp of pain, which was quite 
in accord with Dawson's own feelings, for 

144 



AND SOME OTHERS 

gentle though the pat was, his hand after 
it felt as though he had pressed it upon a 
bunch of needles. 

"Whafs the matter, old fellow?" said 
Dawson, ruefully rubbing the palm of his 
hand. " Did I hurt you ?" 

The dog tried to wag his tail, but un- 
availingly, and Dawson was again filled 
with consternation to observe that even as 
Chung's queue stood high, even as his own 
hair would not lie down, so it was with 
Jack's soft furry skin. Every hair on it 
was erect, from the tip of the poor beast's 
nose to the end of his tail, and so stiff 
withal that when it was pressed from with- 
out it pricked the dog within. 

" There seems to be some starch in the 
air of Dampmere," said Dawson, thought- 
fully, as he turned and walked slowly into 
the house. " I wonder what the deuce it 
all means ?" 

And then he sought his desk and tried to 
write, but he soon found that he could not 
possibly concentrate his mind upon his work. 
He was continually oppressed by the feel- 
ing that he was not alone. At one moment 
K 145 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

it seemed as if there were a pair of eyes 
peering at him from the northeast corner 
of the room, but as soon as he turned his 
own anxious gaze in that direction the dif- 
ficulty seemed to lie in the southwest 
corner. 

" Bah !" he cried, starting up and stamp- 
ing his foot angrily upon the floor. " The 
idea ! I, Charles Dawson, a man of the 
world, scared by — by — well, by nothing. I 
don't believe in ghosts^ — and yet — at times 
I do believe that this house is haunted. 
My hair seems to feel the same way. It 
stands up like stubble in a wheat-field, and 
one might as well try to brush the one as 
the other. At this rate nothing '11 get done. 
I'll go to town and see Dr. Bronson. There's 
something the matter with me." 

So off Dawson went to town. 

" I suppose Bronson will think Tm a fool, 
but I can prove all I say by my hair," he 
said, as he rang the doctor's bell. He was 
instantly admitted, and shortly after de- 
scribing his symptoms he called the doc- 
tor's attention to his hair. 

If he had pinned his faith to this, he 

146 



AND SOME OTHERS 

showed that his faith was misplaced, for 
when the doctor came to examine it, Daw- 
son's hair was lying down as softly as it 
ever had. The doctor looked at Dawson 
for a moment, and then, with a dry cough, 
he said : 

" Dawson, I can conclude one of two 
things from what you tell me. Either 
Dampmere is haunted, which you and I as 
sane men can't believe in these days, or 
else you are playing a practical joke on 
me. Now I don't mind a practical joke at 
the club, my dear fellow, but here, in my 
office hours, I can't afford the time to like 
anything of the sort. I speak frankly with 
you, old fellow. I have to. I hate to do 
it, but, after all, you've brought it on your- 
self." 

" Doctor," Dawson rejoined, " I believe 
I'm a sick man, else this thing wouldn't 
have happened. I solemnly assure you 
that I've come to you because I wanted 
a prescription, and because I believe my- 
self badly off." 

"You carry it off well, Dawson," said 
the doctor, severely, " but I'll prescribe. 

147 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

Go back to Dampmere right away, and 
when youVe seen the ghost, telegraph me 
and I'll come down." 

With this Bronson bowed Dawson out, 
and the latter, poor fellow, soon found him- 
self on the street utterly disconsolate. He 
could not blame Bronson. He could un- 
derstand how Bronson could come to be- 
lieve that, with his hair as the only witness 
to his woes, and a witness that failed him 
at the crucial moment, Bronson should re- 
gard his visit as the outcome of some club 
wager, in many of which he had been in- 
volved previously. 

" I guess his advice is good," said he, 
as he walked along. " I'll go back right 
away — but meanwhile I'll get Billie Perkins 
to come out and spend the night with me, 
and we'll try it on him. I'll ask him out 
for a few days." 

Suffice it to say that Perkins accepted, 
and that night found the two eating supper 
together outwardly serene. Perkins was 
quite interested when Chung brought in 
the supper. 

" Wears his queue Pompadour, I see," he 

148 




QUEUE POMPADOUR, I 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" Then," said Perkins, with a shiver, 
" lef s go to bed." 

The two men retired, Dawson to the room 
directly over the parlor, Perkins to the apart- 
ment back of it. P'or company they left the 
gas burning, and in a short time were fast 
asleep. An hour later Dawson awakened 
with a start. Two things oppressed him 
to the very core of his being. First, the 
gas was out ; and second, Perkins had un- 
mistakably groaned. 

He leaped from his bed and hastened 
into the next room. 

*' Perkins," he cried, " are you ill }" 

" Is that you, Dawson ?" came a voice 
from the darkness. 

" Yes. Did — did you put out the gas ?" 

'' No." 

" Are you ill ?" 

" No ; but I'm deuced uncomfortable 
What's this mattress stuffed with — needles?" 

" Needles ? No. It's a hair mattress. 
Isn't it all right?" 

" Not by a great jieal. I feel as if I had 
been sleeping on a porcupine. Light up 
the gas and let's see what the trouble is." 

150 



AND SOME OTHERS 

Dawson did as he was told, wondering 
meanwhile why the gas had gone out. No 
one had turned it out, and yet the key was 
unmistakably turned ; and, what was worse, 
on ripping open Perkins's mattress, a most 
disquieting state of affairs was disclosed. 

Every single hair in it was standing on end! 

A half-hour later four figures were to be 
seen wending their way northward through 
the darkness — two men, a huge mastiff, and 
a Chinaman. The group was made up of 
Dawson, his guest, his servant, and his dog. 
Dampmere was impossible ; there was no 
train until morning, but not one of them 
was willing to remain a moment longer at 
Dampmere, and so they had to walk. 

" What do you suppose it was ?" asked 
Perkins, as they left the third mile behind 
them. 

" I don't know," said Dawson ; " but it 
must be something terrible. I don't mind 
a ghost that will make the hair of living 
beings stand on end, but a nameless in- 
visible something that affects a mattress 
that way has a terrible potency that I have 

151 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

no desire to combat It's a myster}% and, 
as a rule, I like mysteries, but the mystery 
of Dampmere I'd rather let alone." 

" Don't say a word about the — ah — 
the mattress, Charlie," said Perkins, after 
awhile. " The fellows '11 never believe it." 

*' No. I w^as thinking that very same 
thing," said Dawson. 

And they were both true to Dawson's re- 
solve, which is possibly why the mystery of 
Dampmere has never been solved. 

If any of my readers can furnish a solu- 
tion, I wish they would do so, for I am very 
much interested in the case, and I truly hate 
to leave a story of this kind in so unsatis- 
factory a condition. 

A ghost story without any solution strikes 
me as being about as useful as a house with- 
out a roof. 



CARLETON BARKER, FIRST AND 

SECOND 



My first meeting with Carleton Barker was 
a singular one. A friend and I, in August, 
i8 — , were doing the English Lake District 
on foot, when, on nearing the base of the 
famous Mount Skiddaw, we observed on 
the road, some distance ahead of us, limp- 
ing along and apparently in great pain, the 
man whose subsequent career so sorely puz- 
zled us. Noting his very evident distress, 
Parton and I quickened our pace and soon 
caught up with the stranger, who, as we 
reached his side, fell forward upon his face 
in a fainting condition — as well he might, 
for not only must he have suffered great 
agony from a sprained ankle, but inspec- 
tion of his person disclosed a most extraor- 
dinary gash in his right arm, made appar- 

153 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

ently with a sharp knife, and which was 
bleeding most profusely. To stanch the 
flow of blood was our first care, and Parton, 
having recently been graduated in medicine, 
made short work of relieving the sufferer's 
pain from his ankle, bandaging it about and 
applying such soothing properties as he had 
in his knapsack — properties, by the way, 
with which, knowing the small perils to 
which pedestrians everywhere are liable, he 
was always provided. 

Our patient soon recovered his senses 
and evinced no little gratitude for the ser- 
vice we had rendered him, insisting upon our 
accepting at his hands, merely, he said, as 
a souvenir of our good-Samaritanship, and 
as a token of his appreciation of the same, 
a small pocket-flask and an odd diamond- 
shaped stone pierced in the centre, which 
had hung from the end of his watch-chain, 
held in place by a minute gold ring. The 
flask became the property of Parton, and 
to me fell the stone, the exact hue of which 
I was never able to determine, since it was 
chameleonic in its properties. When it was 
placed in my hands by our "grateful pa- 

154 



AND SOME OTHERS 

tient" it was blood -red; when I looked 
upon it on the following morning it was of 
a livid, indescribable hue, yet lustrous as 
an opal. To-day it is colorless and dull, 
as though some animating quality that it 
had once possessed had forever passed 
from it. 

" You seem to have met with an acci- 
dent," said Parton, when the injured man 
had recovered sufficiently to speak. 

" Yes," he said, wincing with pain, " I 
have. I set out for Saddleback this morn- 
ing — I wished to visit the Scales Tarn and 
get a glimpse of those noonday stars that 
are said to make its waters lustrous, 
and—" 

"And to catch the immortal fish?'' I 
queried. 

*' No," he replied, with a laugh. " I 
should have been satisfied to see the stars — 
and I did see the stars, but not the ones 
I set out to see. I have always been more 
or less careless of my safety, walking with 
my head in the clouds and letting my feet 
look out for themselves. The result was 
that I slipped on a moss-covered stone and 

155 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

fell over a very picturesque bit of scenery 
on to some more stones that, unfortunately, 
were not moss-covered." 

" But the cut in your arm ?" said Parton, 
suspiciously. "That looks as if somebody 
else had given it to you." 

The stranger's face flushed as red as could 
be considering the amount of blood he had 
lost, and a look of absolute devilishness that 
made my flesh creep came into his eyes. 
For a moment he did not speak, and then, 
covering the delay in his answer with a groan 
of anguish, he said : 

** Oh, that ! Yes — I — I did manage to 
cut myself rather badly and — " 

" I don't see how you could, though," 
insisted Parton. " You couldn't reach that 
part of yourself with a knife, if you tried." 

" That's just the reason why you should 
see for yourself that it was caused by my 
falling on my knife. I had it grasped in 
my right hand, intending to cut myself a 
stick, when I slipped. As I slipped it flew 
from my hand and I landed on it, fortu- 
nately on the edge and not on the point," 
he explained, his manner far from convinc- 

156 



AND SOME OTHERS 

ing, though the explanation seemed so sim- 
ple that to doubt it were useless. 

" Did you recover the knife ?" asked Par- 
ton. " It must have been a mighty sharp 
one, and rather larger than most people 
carry about with them on excursions like 
yours." 

" I am not on the witness-stand, sir," re- 
turned the other, somewhat petulantly, " and 
so I fail to see why you should question me 
so closely in regard to so simple a matter — 
as though you suspected me of some wrong- 
doing." 

" My friend is a doctor," I explained ; 
for while I was quite as much interested in 
the incident, its whys and wherefores, as 
was Parton, I had myself noticed that he 
was suspicious of his chance patient, and 
seemingly not so sympathetic as he would 
otherwise have been. " He regards you as 
a case." 

" Not at all," returned Parton. " I am 
simply interested to know how you hurt 
yourself — that is all. I mean no offence, 
I am sure, and if anything I have said has 
hurt your feelings I apologize." 

157 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" Don't mention it, doctor," replied the 
other, with an uneasy smile, holding his 
left hand out towards Parton as he spoke. 
** I am in great pain, as you know, and per- 
haps I seem irritable. I'm not an amiable 
man at best ; as for the knife, in my agony 
I never thought to look for it again, though 
I suppose if I had looked I should not have 
found it, since it doubtless fell into the un- 
derbrush out of sight. Let it rest there. 
It has not done me a friendly service to-day 
and I shall waste no tears over it." 

With which effort at pleasantry he rose 
with some difficulty to his feet, and with 
the assistance of Parton and myself walked 
on and into Keswick, where we stopped for 
the night. The stranger registered di- 
rectly ahead of Parton and myself, writing 
the words, " Carleton Barker, Calcutta," 
in the book, and immediately retired to his 
room, nor did we see him again that night. 
After supper we looked for him, but as he 
was nowhere to be seen, we concluded that 
he had gone to bed to seek the recupera- 
tion of rest. Parton and I lit our cigars 
and, though somewhat fatigued by our ex- 

158 



AND SOME OTHERS 

ertions, strolled quietly about the more or 
less somnolent burg in which we were, dis- 
cussing the events of the day, and chiefly 
our new acquaintance. 

" I don't half like that fellow," said Par- 
ton, with a dubious shake of the head. " If 
a dead body should turn up near or on Skid- 
daw to-morrow morning, I wouldn't like to 
wager that Mr. Carleton Barker hadn't put 
it there. He acted to me like a man who 
had something to conceal, and if I could 
have done it without seeming ungracious, 
I'd have flung his old flask as far into the 
fields as I could. I've half a mind to show 
my contempt for it now by filling it with 
some of that beastly claret they have at the 
table d^hbte here, and chucking the whole 
thing into the lake. It was an insult to 
offer those things to us." 

" I think you are unjust, Parton," I said. 
" He certainly did look as if he had been 
in a maul with somebody. There was a 
nasty scratch on his face, and that cut on 
the arm was suspicious ; but I can't see but 
that his explanation was clear enough. Your 
manner was too irritating. I think if I had 

159 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

met with an accident and was assisted by 
an utter stranger who, after placing me un- 
der obligations to him, acted towards me as 
though I were an unconvicted criminal, I'd 
be as mad as he was ; and as for the insult 
of his offering, in my eyes that was the only 
way he could soothe his injured feelings* 
He was angry at your suspicions, and to be 
entirely your debtor for services didn't 
please him. His gift to me was made sim- 
ply because he did not wish to pay you ia 
substance and me in thanks." 

" I don't go so far as to call him an un- 
convicted criminal, but I'll swear his record 
isn't clear as daylight, and I'm morally con- 
vinced that if men's deeds were written on 
their foreheads Carleton Barker, esquire, 
would wear his hat down over his eyes. I 
don't like him. I instinctively dislike him. 
Did you see the look in his eyes when I 
mentioned the knife ?" 

" I did," I replied. " And it made me 
shudder." 

"It turned every drop of blood in my 
veins cold," said Parton. ** It made me 
feel that if he had had that knife within 

i6o 



AND SOME OTHERS 

reach he would have trampled it to powder, 
even if every stamp of his foot cut his flesh 
through to the bone. Malignant is the 
word to describe that glance, and I'd rath- 
er encounter a rattle -snake than see it 
again," 

Parton spoke with such evident earnest- 
ness that I took refuge in silence. I could 
see just where a man of Parton's tempera- 
ment — which was cold and eminently ju- 
dicial even when his affections were con- 
cerned — could find that in Barker at which 
to cavil, but, for all that, I could not sympa- 
thize with the extreme view he took of his 
character. I have known many a man upon 
whose face nature has set the stamp of the 
villain much more deeply than it was im- 
pressed upon Barker's countenance, who 
has lived a life most irreproachable, whose 
every act has been one of unselfishness and 
for the good of mankind; and I have also 
seen outward appearing saints whose every 
instinct was base ; and it seemed to me that 
the physiognomy of the unfortunate victim 
of the moss -covered rock and vindictive 
knife was just enough of a medium between 
L i6i 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

that of the irredeemable sinner and the ster- 
linir saint to indicate that its owner was the 
average man in the matter of vices and virt- 
ues. In fact, the maHgnancy of his ex- 
pression when the knife was mentioned was 
to me the sole point against him, and had 
I been in his position I do not think I 
should have acted very differently, though 
I must add that if I thought myself capable 
of freezing any person's blood with an ex- 
pression of my eyes I should be strongly 
templed to wear blue glasses when in com- 
pany or before a mirror. 

" I think I'll send my card up to him, 
Jack,'' I said to Parton, when we had re- 
turned to the hotel, " just to ask how he 
is. Wouldn't you ?" 

" No !" snapped Parton. " But then I'm 
not you. You can do as you please. Don't 
let me influence you against him — if he's to 
your taste.'* 

" He isn't at all to my taste," I retorted. 
" I don't care for him particularly, but it 
seems to me courtesy requires that we show 
a little interest in his welfare." 

" Be courteous, then, and show your inter- 

162 



AND SOME OTHERS 

est," said Parton. " I don't care as long 
as I am not dragged into it." 

I sent my card up by the boy, who, re- 
turning in a moment, said that the door was 
locked, adding that when he had knocked 
upon it there came no answer, from which 
he presumed that Mr. Barker had gone to 
sleep. 

" He seemed all right when you took his 
supper to his room ?" I queried. 

" He said he wouldn't have any sup- 
per. Just wanted to be left alone," said 
the boy. 

" Sulking over the knife still, I imagine," 
sneered Parton ; and then he and I retired 
to our room and prepared for bed. 

I do not suppose I had slept for more 
than an hour when I was awakened by Par- 
ton, who was pacing the floor like a caged 
tiger, his eyes all ablaze, and laboring un- 
der an intense nervous excitement. 

"What's the matter. Jack?" I asked, sit- 
ting up in bed. 

*' That d — ned Barker has upset my 
nerves," he replied. " I can't get him out 
of my mind." 

163 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

"Oh, pshaw!" I replied. "Don't be 
silly. Forget him." 

"Silly?" he retorted, angrily. "Silly? 
Forget him ? Hang it, I would forget him 
if he'd let me — but he won't." 

" What has he got 'to do with it ?" 

" More than is decent," ejaculated Par- 
ton. " More than is decent. He has just 
been peering in through that window there, 
and he means no good." 

" Why, you're mad," I remonstrated. 
" He couldn't peer in at the window — we 
are on the fourth floor, and there is no pos- 
sible way in which he could reach the win- 
dow, much less peer in at it." 

" Nevertheless," insisted Parton, " Carle- 
ton Barker for ten minutes previous to your 
waking was peering in at me through that 
window there, and in his glance was that 
same malignant, hateful quality that so set 
me against him to-day — and another thing, 
Bob," added Parton, stopping his nervous 
walk for a moment and shaking his finger 
impressively at me — "another thing which 
I did not tell you before because I thought 
it would fill you with that same awful dread 

164 



AND SOME OTHERS 

that has come to me since meeting Barker — 
the blood from that man's arm, the blood 
that stained his shirt-sleeve crimson, that 
besmeared his clothes, spurted out upon 
my cuff and coat-sleeve when I strove to 
stanch its flow !" 

" Yes, I remember that," said I. 

" And now look at my cuff and sleeve 1" 
whispered Parton, his face grown white. 

I looked. 

There was no stain of any sort whatsoever 
upon either ! 

Certainly there must have been some- 
thing wrong about Carleton Barker. 

II 

The mystery of Carleton Barker was by 
no means lessened when next morning it 
was found that his room not only was 
empty, but that, as far as one could judge 
from the aspect of things therein, it had 
not been occupied at all. Furthermore, our 
chance acquaintance had vanished, leaving 
no more trace of his whereabouts than if he 
had never existed. 

165 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" Good riddance," said Parton. " I am 
afraid he and I would have come to blows 
sooner or later, because the mere thought 
of him was beginning to inspire me with a 
desire to thrash him. Fm sure he deserves 
a trouncing, whoever he is." 

I, too, was glad the fellow had passed out 
of our ken, but not for the reason advanced 
by Parton. Since the discovery of the stain- 
less cuff, where marks of blood ought by 
nature to have been, I goose-fleshed at the 
mention of his name. There was something 
so inexpressibly uncanny about a creature 
having a fluid of that sort in his veins. In 
fact, so unpleasantly was I impressed by 
that episode that I was unwilling even to 
join in a search for the mysteriously miss- 
ing Barker, and by common consent Parton 
and I dropped him entirely as a subject for 
conversation. 

We spent the balance of our week at Kes- 
wick, using it as our head-quarters for little 
trips about the surrounding country, which 
is most charmingly adapted to the wants of 
those inclined to pedestrianism, and on Sun- 
day evening began preparations for our de- 

i66 



AND SOME OTHERS 

parture, discarding our knickerbockers and 
resuming the habiliments of urban life, in- 
tending on Monday morning to run up to 
Edinburgh, there to while away a few days 
before starting for a short trip through the 
Trossachs. 

While engaged in packing our portman- 
teaux there came a sharp knock at the door, 
and upon opening it I found upon the 
hall floor an envelope addressed to myself. 
There was no one anywhere in the hall, 
and, so quickly had I opened the door after 
the knock, that fact mystified me. It would 
hardly have been possible for any person, 
however nimble of foot, to have passed out 
of sight in the period which had elapsed 
between the summons and my response. 

"What is it?" asked Parton, observing 
that I was slightly agitated. 

" Nothing,," I said, desirous of concealing 
from him the matter that bothered me, lest 
I should be laughed at for my pains. '* Noth- 
ing, except a letter for me." 

"Not by post, is it?"" he queried; to 
which he added, " Can't be. There is no 
mail here to-day. Some friend ?" 

167 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" I don't know," I said, trying, in a 
somewhat feminine fashion, to solve the 
authorship of the letter before opening it 
by staring at the superscription. ** I don't 
recognize the handwriting at all." 

I then opened the letter, and glancing 
hastily at the signature was filled with un- 
easiness to see who my correspondent was. 

" It's from that fellow Barker," I said. 

" Barker !" cried Barton. " What on 
earth has Barker been writing to you 
about ?" 

" He is in trouble," I replied, as I read 
the letter. 

** Financial, I presume, and wants a lift?" 
suggested Barton. 

*' Worse than that," said I, " he is in 
prison in London." 

"Wha-a-at?" ejaculated Barton. "In 
prison in London ? What for ?" 

" On suspicion of having murdered an 
innkeeper in the South of England on 
Tuesday, August i6th." 

" Well, I'm sorry to say that I believe he 
was guilty," returned Barton, without re- 
liecting that the i6th day of August was the 

i6S 



AND SOME OTHERS 

day upon which he and I had first encoun- 
tered Barker. 

" That's your prejudice, Jack," said I. 
" If you'll think a minute you'll know he 
was innocent. He was here on August 
1 6th — last Tuesday. It was then that you 
and I saw him for the first time limping 
along the road and bleeding from a wound 
in the shoulder." 

"Was Tuesday the i6th.?" said Parton, 
counting the days backward on his fingers. 
" That's a fact. It was — but it's none of 
my affair anyhow. It is too blessed queer 
for me to mix myself up in it, and I say let 
him languish in jail. He deserved it for 
something, I am sure — " 

" Well, I'm not so confoundedly heart- 
less," I returned, pounding the table with 
my fist, indignant that Parton should allow 
his prejudices to run away with his sense of 
justice. " I'm going to London to do as 
he asks." 

" What does he want you to do ? Prove 
an alibi ?" 

" Precisely ; and I'm going and you're 
going, and I shall see if the landlord here 

169 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

won't let me take one of his boys along to 
support our testimony — at my own expense 
if need be." 

" YouVe right, old chap," returned Par- 
ton, after a moment of internal struggle. 
" I suppose we really ought to help the 
fellow out of his scrape ; but Vm decidedly 
averse to getting mixed up in an affair of 
any kind with a man like Carleton Barker, 
much less in an affair with murder in it. Is 
he specific about the murder ?'' 

" No. He refers me to the London pa- 
pers of the 17th and i8th for details. He 
hadn't time to write more, because he comes 
up for examination on Tuesday morning, 
and as our presence is essential to his case 
he was necessarily hurried." 

" It's deucedly hard luck for us," said 
Parton, ruefully. " It means no Scotland 
this trip." 

" How about Barker's luck ?" I asked. 
" He isn't fighting for a Scottish trip — he's 
fighting for his life." 

And so it happened that on Monday 
morning, instead of starting for Edinburgh, 
we boarded the train for London at Car- 

170 



AND SOME OTHERS 

lisle. We tried to get copies of the news- 
papers containing accounts of the crime that 
had been committed, but our efforts were 
unavailing, and it was not until we arrived 
in London and were visited by Barker's at- 
torneys that we obtained any detailed in- 
formation whatsoever of the murder; and 
when we did get it we were more than ever 
regretful to be mixed up in it, for it was an 
unusually brutal murder. Strange to say, the 
evidence against Barker was extraordinarily 
convincing, considering that at the time of 
the commission of the crime he was hun- 
dreds of miles from the scene. There was 
testimony from railway guards, neighbors of 
the murdered innkeeper, and others, that 
it was Barker and no one else who com- 
mitted the crime. His identification was 
complete, and the wound in his shoulder 
was shown almost beyond the possibility of 
doubt to have been inflicted by the mur- 
dered man in self-defence. 

" Our only hope," said the attorney, grave- 
ly, " is in proving an alibi. I do not know 
what to believe myself, the chain of evi- 
dence against my client is so complete ; and 

171 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

yet he asserts his innocence, and has stated 
to me that you two gentlemen could assist 
in proving it. If you actually encountered 
Carleton Barker in the neighborhood of 
Keswick on the i6th of this month, the 
whole case against him falls to the ground. 
If not, I fear his outlook has the gallows 
at the small end of the perspective." 

** We certainly did meet a Carleton Bar- 
ker at Keswick on Tuesday, August i6th," 
returned Parton ; " and he was wounded in 
the shoulder, and his appearance was what 
might have been expected of one who had 
been through just such a frightful murder 
as we understand this to have been ; but 
this was explained to us as due to a fall 
over rocks in the vicinity of the Scales Tarn 
— which was plausible enough to satisfy my 
friend here." 

*' And not yourself ?" queried the attorney. 

*' Well, I don't see what that has to do 
with it," returned Parton. "As to the lo- 
cality there is no question. He was there. 
We saw him, and others saw him, and we 
have taken the trouble to come down here 

to state the fact, and have brought with us 

172 



AND SOME OTHERS 

the call-boy from the hotel, who can support 
our testimony if it is not regarded as suf- 
ficient. I, advise you, however, as attorney 
for Barker, not to inquire too deeply into 
that matter, because I am convinced that if 
he isn't guilty of this crime — as of course 
he is not — he hasn't the cleanest record in 
the world. He has bad written on every 
line of his face, and there were one or two 
things connected with our meeting with him 
that mightn't be to his taste to have men- 
tioned in court." 

" I don't need advice, thank you," said 
the attorney, dryly. " I wish simply to es- 
tablish the fact of his presence at Keswick 
at the hour of 5 p.m. on Tuesday, August 
1 6th. That was the hour at which the mur- 
der is supposed — in fact, is proved — to have 
been committed. At 5.30, according to 
witnesses, my client was seen in the neigh- 
borhood, faint with loss of blood from a 
knife-wound in the shoulder. Barker has 
the knife-wound, but he might have a dozen 
of them and be acquitted if he wasn't in 
Frewenton on the day in question." 

" You may rely upon us to prove that," 

173 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

said I. "We will swear to it. We can 
produce tangible objects presented to us 
on that afternoon by Barker — " 

** I can't produce mine,'' said Parton. 
" I threw it into the lake.'* 

" Well, I can produce the stone he gave 
me," said I, "and Til do it if you wish." 

**That will be sufficient, I think," re- 
turned the attorney. " Barker spoke es- 
pecially about that stone, for it was a half 
of an odd souvenir of the East, where he 
was born, and he fortunately has the other 
half. The two will fit together at the point 
where the break was made, and our case 
will be complete." 

The attorney then left us. The following 
day we appeared at the preliminary exami- 
nation, which proved to be the whole ex- 
amination as well, since, despite the dam- 
ning circumstantial evidence against Barker, 
evidence which shook my belief almost in 
the veracity of my own eyes, our plain state- 
ments, substantiated by the evidence of the 
call-boy and the two halves of the oriental 
pebble, one in my possession and the other 
in Barker's, brought about the discharge 

174 



AND SOME OTHERS 

of the prisoner from custody ; and the " Fre- 
wenton Atrocity" became one of many 
horrible murders, the mystery of which lime 
alone, if anything, could unravel. 

After Barker was released he came to me 
and thanked me most effusively for the ser- 
vice rendered him, and in many ways made 
himself agreeable during the balance of our 
stay in London. Parton, however, would 
have nothing to do with him, and to me 
most of his attentions were paid. He al- 
ways had a singularly uneasy way about 
him, as though he were afraid of some im- 
pending trouble, and finally after a day 
spent with him slumming about London — 
and a more perfect slummer no one ever 
saw, for he was apparently familiar with 
every one of the worst and lowest resorts 
in all of London as well as on intimate 
terms with leaders in the criminal world — 
I put a few questions to him impertinently 
pertinent to himself. He was surprisingly 
frank in his answers. I was quite prepared 
for a more or less indignant refusal when 
I asked him to account for his intimacy 
with these dregs of civilization. 

175 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" It's a long story," he said, "but lUl tell 
it to you. Let us run in here and have a 
chop, and Til give you some account of 
myself over a mug of ale." 

We entered one of the numerous small 
eating-houses that make London a delight 
to the lover of the chop in the fulness of its 
glory. When we were seated and the lunch- 
eon ordered Barker began. 

*' I have led a very unhappy life. I was 
born in India thirty-nine years ago, and while 
my every act has been as open and as free 
of wrong as are those of an infant, I have 
constantly been beset by such untoward 
affairs as this in which you have rendered 
such inestimable service. At the age of five, 
in Calcutta, I was in peril of my liberty on 
the score of depravity, although I never com- 
mitted any act that could in any sense be 
called depraved. The main cause of my 
trouble at that time was a small girl of ten 
whose sight was partially destroyed by the 
fiendish act of some one who, according to 
her statement, wantonly hurled a piece of 
broken glass into one of her eyes. The girl 
said it was I who did it, although at the 

176 



AND SOME OTHERS 

time it was done, according to my mother's 
testimony, I was playing in her room and in 
her plain view. That alone would not have 
been a very serious matter for me, because 
the injured child might have been herself 
responsible for her injury, but in a childish 
spirit of fear, afraid to say so, and, not re- 
alizing the enormity of the charge, have laid 
it at the door of any one of her playmates 
she saw fit. She stuck to her story, however, 
and there were many who believed that she 
spoke the truth and that my mother, in an 
endeavor to keep me out of trouble, had 
stated what was not true." 

"But you were innocent, of course.?" I 
said. 

" I am sorry you think it necessary to ask 

that," he replied, his pallid face flushing 

with a not unnatural indignation; "and I 

decline to answer it," he added. "I have 

made a practice of late, when I am in trouble 

or in any way under suspicion, to let others 

do my pleading and prove my innocence. 

But you didn't mean to be like your friend 

Parton, I know, and I cannot be angry with 

a man who has done so much for me as you 
M 177 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

have — so let it pass. I \vas saying that 
standing alone the accusation of that young 
girl would not have been serious in its ef- 
fects in view of my mother's testimony, had 
not a seeming corroboration come three 
days later, when another child was reported 
to have been pushed over an embankment 
and maimed for life by no less a person 
than my poor innocent self. This time I 
was again, on my mother's testimony, at her 
side ; but there were witnesses of the crime, 
and they every one of them swore to my 
guilt, and as a consequence we found it ad- 
visable to leave the home that had been 
ours since my birth, and to come to England. 
My father had contemplated returning to 
his own country for some time, and the rep- 
utation that I had managed unwittingly to 
build up for myself in Calcutta was of a sort 
that made it easier for him to make up his 
mind. He at first swore that he would fer- 
ret out the mystery in the matter, and would 
go through Calcutta with a drag-net if neces- 
sary to find the possible other boy who so 
resembled me that his outrageous acts were 
put upon my shoulders ; but people had be- 

178 



AND SOME OTHERS 

gun to make up their minds that there was 
not only something wrong about me, but 
that my mother knew it and had tried to get 
me out of my scrapes by lying — so there was 
nothing for us to do but leave." 

" And you never solved the mystery ?*' I 
queried. 

"Well, not exactly," returned Barker, 
gazing abstractedly before him. " Not ex- 
actly; but I have a theory, based upon the 
bitterest kind of experience, that I know 
what the trouble is." 

"You have a double ?" I asked. 

" You are a good guesser," he replied ; 
"and of all unhanged criminals he is the 
very worst." 

There was a strange smile on his lips as 
Carleton Barker said this. His tone was 
almost that of one who was boasting — in 
fact, so strongly was I impressed with his 
appearance of conceit when he estimated 
the character of his double, that I felt bold 
enough to say : 

"You seem to be a little proud of it, in 
spite of all." 

Barker laughed. 

179 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" I can't help it, though he has kept me 
on tenter- hooks for a lifetime," he said. 
" We all feel a certain amount of pride in 
the success of those to whom we are related, 
either by family ties or other shackles like 
those with which I am bound to my murder- 
ous alter ego. I knew an Englishman once 
who was so impressed with the notion that 
he resembled the great Napoleon that he 
conceived the most ardent hatred for his 
own country for having sent the illustrious 
Frenchman to St. Helena. The same in- 
fluence — a very subtle one — I feel. Here is 
a man who has maimed and robbed and 
murdered for years, and has never yet been 
apprehended. In his chosen calling he has 
been successful, and though I have been 
put to my trumps many a time to save my 
neck from the retribution that should have 
been his, I can't help admiring the fellow, 
though I'd kill him if he stood before me !" 

"And are you making any effort to find 
him ?'' 

"I am, of course," said Barker; "that 
has been my life-work. I am fortunately 
possessed of means enough to live on, so 

1 80 



AND SOME OTHERS 

that I can devote all my time to unravelling 
the mystery. It is for this reason that I 
have acquainted myself with the element of 
London with which, as you have noticed, 
I am very familiar. The life these criminals 
are leading is quite as revolting to me as it 
is to you, and the scenes you and I have 
witnessed together are no more unpleasant 
to you than they are to me; but what can I 
do ? The man lives and must be run down. 
He is in England, I am certain. This latest 
diversion of his has convinced me of that." 

"Well," said I, rising, "you certainly 
have my sympathy, Mr. Barker, and I hope 
your efforts will meet with success. I trust 
you will have the pleasure of seeing the oth- 
er gentleman hanged." 

" Thank you," he said, with a queer look 
in his eyes, which, as I thought it over after- 
wards, did not seem to be quite as appropri- 
ate to his expression of gratitude as it might 
have been. 

Ill 

When Barker and I parted that day it 
was for a longer period than either of us 

i8i 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

dreamed, for upon my arrival at my lodg- 
ings I found there a cable message from 
New York, calling me back to my labors. 
Three days later I sailed for home, and five 
years elapsed before I was so fortunate as 
to renew my acquaintance with foreign 
climes. Occasionally through these years 
Parton and I discussed Barker, and at no 
time did my companion show anything 
but an increased animosity towards our 
strange Keswick acquaintance. The men- 
tion of his name was sufficient to drive 
Parton from the height of exuberance to a 
state of abject depression. 

" I shall not feel easy while that man 
lives," he said. " I think he is a minion of 
Satan. There is nothing earthly alDout him." 

"Nonsense," said I. "Just because a 
man has a bad face is no reason for suppos- 
ing him a villain or a supernatural creature." 

"No," Parton answered; "but when a 
man's veins hold blood that saturates and 
leaves no stain, what are we to think ?" 

I confessed that this was a point beyond 
me, and, by mutual consent, we dropped 
the subject. 

182 



AND SOiME OTHERS 

One night Parton came to my rooms white 
as a sheet, and so agitated that for a few 
minutes he could not speak. He dropped, 
shaking like a leaf, into my reading-chair 
and buried his face in his hands. His at- 
titude was that of one frightened to the very 
core of his being. When I questioned him 
first he did not respond. He simply groaned. 
I resumed my reading for a few moments, 
and then looking up observed that Parton 
had recovered somewhat and was now gaz- 
ing abstractedly into the fire. 

"Well," I said, "feeling better?" 

" Yes," he answered, slowly. " But it 
was a shock." 

" What was ?" I asked. " YouVe told me 
nothing as yet." 

" I've seen Barker." 

" No !" I cried. " Where ?" 

" In a back alley down-town, where I had 
to go on a hospital call. There was a row 
in a gambling-hell in Hester Street. Two 
men were cut and I had to go with the am- 
bulance. Both men will probably die, and 
no one can find any trace of the murderer; 
but I know who he is. He was Carleton 

183 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

Barker and no one else. I passed him in 
the alley on the way in, and I saw him in 
the crowd when I came out." 

**\Vas he alone in the alley?" I asked. 
Parton groaned again. 

** That's the worst of it," said he. " He 
was not alone. He was with Carleton 
Barker." 

*' Vou speak in riddles," said I. 

" I saw in riddles," said Parton ; " for as 
truly as I sit here there were two of them, 
and they stood side by side as I passed 
through, alike as two peas, and crime writ- 
ten on the pallid face of each." 

" Did Barker recognize you ?" 

" I think so, for as I passed he gasped — 
both of them gasped, and as I stopped to 
speak to the one I had first recognized he 
had vanished as completely as though he had 
never been, and as I turned to address the 
other he was shambling off into the dark- 
ness as fast as his legs could carry him." 

I was stunned. Barker had been mysteri- 
ous enough in London. In New Vork with 
his double, and again connected with an 
atrocity, he became even more so, and I be- 

184 



AND SOME OTHERS 

gan to feel somewhat towards him as had 
Parton from the first. The papers next 
morning were not very explicit on the sub- 
ject of the Hester Street trouble, but they 
confirmed Parton's suspicions in his and 
my own mind as to whom the assassins 
were. The accounts published simply 
stated that the wounded men, one of whom 
had died in the night and the other of 
whom would doubtless not live through the 
day, had been set upon and stabbed by two 
unknown Englishmen who had charged 
them with cheating at cards; that the as- 
sailants had disappeared, and that the po- 
lice had no clew as to their whereabouts. 

Time passed and nothing further came to 
light concerning the Barkers, and gradually 
Parton and I came to forget them. The 
following summer I went abroad again, and 
then came the climax to the Barker episode, 
as we called it. I can best tell the story of 
that climax by printing here a letter written 
by myself to Parton. It was penned within 
an hour of the supreme moment, and while 
it evidences my own mental perturbation in 
its lack of coherence, it is none the less 

185 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

an absolutely truthful account of what hap- 
pened. The letter is as follows : 

** London, July 18, 18—. 

" My dear Parton, — You once said to 
me that you could not breathe easily while 
this world held Carleton Barker living. You 
may now draw an easy breath, and many of 
them, for the Barker episode is over. Barker 
is dead, and I flatter myself that I am doing 
very well myself to live sanely after the ex- 
periences of this morning. 

*' About a week after my arrival in Eng- 
land a horrible tragedy was enacted in the 
Seven Dials district. A woman was the 
victim, and a devil in human form the per- 
petrator of the crime. The poor creature 
was literally hacked to pieces in a manner 
suggesting the hand of Jack the Ripper, but 
in this instance the murderer, unlike Jack, 
was caught red-handed, and turned out to 
be no less a person than Carleton Barker. 
He was tried and convicted, and sentenced 
to be hanged at twelve o'clock to-day. 

"When I heard of Barker's trouble I 
went, as a matter of curiosity solely, to the 

186 



AND SOME OTHERS 

trial, and discovered in the dock the man you 
and I had encountered at Keswick. That 
is to say, he resembled our friend in every 
possible respect. If he were not Barker he 
was the most perfect imitation of Barker 
conceivable. Not a feature of our Barker 
but was reproduced in this one, even to the 
name. But he failed to recognize me. He 
saw me, I know, because I felt his eyes 
upon me, but in trying to return his gaze I 
quailed utterly before him. I could not 
look him in the eye without a feeling of the 
most deadly horror, but I did see enough of 
him to note that he regarded me only as 
one of a thousand spectators who had 
flocked into the court- room during the 
progress of the trial. If it were our Barker 
who sat there his dissemblance was remark- 
able. So coldly did he look at me that I 
began to doubt if he really were the man we 
had met ; but the events of this morning have 
changed my mind utterly on that point. 
He was the one we had met, and I am now 
convinced that his story to me of his double 
was purely fictitious, and that from begin- 
ning to end there has been but one Barker. 

187 



GHOSTS I HAVE MET 

" The trial was a speedy one. There was 
nothing to be said in behalf of the prisoner, 
and within five days of his arraignment he 
was convicted and sentenced to the extreme 
penalty — that of hanging — and noon to-day 
was the hour appointed for the execution. 
I was to have gone to Richmond to-day by 
coach, but since Barker's trial I have been 
in a measure depressed. I have grown to 
dislike the man as thoroughly as did you, 
and yet I was very much affected by the 
thought that he was finally to meet death 
upon the scaffold. I could not bring myself 
to participate in any pleasures on the day 
of his execution, and in consequence I gave 
up my Richmond journey and remained all 
morning in my lodgings trying to read. It 
was a miserable effort. I could not con- 
centrate my mind upon my book — no book 
could have held the slightest part of my at- 
tention at that time. My thoughts were all 
for Carleton Barker, and I doubt if, when 
the clock hands pointed to half after eleven, 
Barker himself was more apprehensive over 
what was to come than I. I found myself 
holding my watch in my hand, gazing at the 

i88 



AND SOME OTHERS 

dial and counting the seconds which must 
intervene before the last dreadful scene of 
a life of crime. I would rise from my chair 
and pace my room nervously for a few min- 
utes ; then I would throw myself into my 
chair again and stare at my watch. This 
went on nearly all the morning — in fact, 
until ten minutes before twelve, when there 
came a slight knock at my door. I put 
aside my nervousness as well as I could, 
and, walking to the door, opened it. 

"I wonder that I have nerve to write of 
it, Parton, but there upon the threshold, 
clad in the deepest black, his face pallid as 
the head of death itself and his hands shak- 
ing like those of a palsied man, stood no 
less a person than Carleton Barker ! 

" I staggered back in amazement and he 
followed me, closing the door and locking 
it behind him. 

" * What would you do ?* I cried, regard- 
ing his act with alarm, for, candidly, I was 
almost abject with fear. 

" * Nothing — to you !' he said. * You have 
been as far as you could be my friend. The 
other, your companion of Keswick' — 

189 



GHOSTS 1 HAVE MET 

meaning you, of course — *was my en- 
emy/ 

** I was glad you were not with us, my 
dear Parton. I should have trembled for 
your safety. 

*' * How have you managed to escape ?* I 
asked. 

** * I have not escaped,' returned Barker. 
* But I soon shall be free from my accursed 
double.* 

*• Here he gave an unearthly laugh and 
pointed to the clock. 

''*Ha, ha!* he cried. * Five minutes 
more — five minutes more and I shall be 
free.' 

***Then the man in the dock was not 
you ?' I asked. 

'**The man in the dock,' he answered, 
slowly, *is even now mounting the gallows, 
whilst I stand here.' 

** He trembled a little as he spoke, and 
lurched forward like a drunken man; but 
he soon recovered himself, grasping the 
back of my chair convulsively with his long 
white fingers. 

" * In two minutes more,' he whispered, 

190 



AND SOME OTHERS 

* the rope will be adjusted about his neck ; 
the black cap is even now being drawn over 
his cursed features, and — ' 

** Here he shrieked with laughter, and, 
rushing to the window, thrust his head out 
and literally sucked the air into his lungs, 
as a man with a parched throat would have 
drank water. Then he turned and, totter- 
ing back to my side, hoarsely demanded 
some brandy. 

" It was fortunately at hand, and pre- 
cisely as the big bells in Westminster be- 
gan to sound the hour of noon, he caught 
up the goblet and held it aloft. 

" * To him !' he cried. 

"And then, Parton, standing before me 
in my lodgings, as truly as I write, he re- 
mained fixed and rigid until the twelfth 
stroke of the bells sounded, when he liter- 
ally faded from my sight, and the goblet, 
failing to the floor, was shattered into count- 
less atoms !'' 



THE END 



'- - * " I /I 



/• ' 



»• 






^ y 






-^ ' 



/ y 



/ • 



; • t 









X r 



.-' f 






'*'■ «* r!"^ 




j^/ ^u..A 



J' 



.9 



I* 



I 



^U,4 U^_?..i™ ¥?i 



THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS 
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON 
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES. 

Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambridge, MA 021 38 (61 7) 495-241 3 




