The Small Library


1907


Exported from Wikisource on September 23, 2026


THE SMALL LIBRARY


The English Library.


Fcap, 8vo, blue cloth gilt, gilt tops, each 2s. 6d.


English, Past and Present. By Archbishop R. C. Trench, edited by Dr. A. Smythe Palmer.

The Folk and their Word-Lore: an Essay on Popular Etymologies. By Rev. Dr. A. Smythe Palmer.

On the Study of Words. By Archbishop R. C. Trench. Edited by Dr. A. Smythe Palmer.

The Principles and Practice of Punctuation. By T. F. Husband, M.A.

How to Read English Literature: Chaucer to Milton. By Laurie Magnus, M.A.

—— Dryden to Meredith. By the same.

Shakespeare's Debt to his Predecessors, and his Successors' debt to him. By Wm. Swan Sonnenschein

Documents Illustrating Elizabethen Poetry: (Sidney's, Puttenham's, and Webbe's Treatises). Edited by Laurie Magnus, M.A.

Select English Glossary of English Words used formerly in different senses from their present. By Archbishop Trench. Edited by Dr. A. Smythe Palmer.

History in Fiction: an Annotated Guide to Historical Romances, etc., with Dates, Prices, and Publishers: British. By E. A. Baker, M.A.

—— American and (translated) Foreign.

Manual of Practical Bibliography. By J. D. Brown.

The Small Library: a Guide to the collection and care of books. By J. D. Brown.

Curious from a Word-Collector's Cabinet. By Dr. A. Smythe Palmer.


THE

SMALL LIBRARY

A Guide to the Collection and

Care of Books

By

James Duff Brown

Borough Librarian, Islington. Author of "Manual of

Library Economy," "Manual of Practical

Bibliography," etc


London

George Routledge & Sons Limited

New York: E. P. Dutton & Co

1907


Contents Chap. Page

I Introduction


1

II Children's Home Libraries


11

III The Household Library


29

IV Professional and Workshop Libraries


47

V The School Library


55

VI The Small Municipal Library


71

VII Classification


79

VIII Cataloguing


89

IX Book Selection


109

X Public Service and Rules


139

Appendix: Bibliography of Useful Books


149

Index


152


This work was published before January 1, 1931, and is in the public domain worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Of all the difficult, hazardous and thankless tasks which well-meaning persons can choose for the improvement of their fellows, perhaps none is so unproductive, in some quarters, as book-selection and the recommendation of reading matter. In ninety cases out of a hundred, persons who read books recommended by others will contemn the judgment and taste of the recommender, and even hint at a certain lack of knowledge and critical perception. As a rule, educated and well-read people should never be assisted in any way in their reading or choice of books, because they are almost sure to resent even well-meant efforts, as an officious intrusion into the sanctity of their own superior knowledge. And, no doubt, it is somewhat of an insult to a thorough-going specialist to have some less-learned bibliographer thrusting forth with his selection of books and annotations, as a kind of last word on the subject. Furthermore, the book-browser, or desultory reader, is another who scorns aids to systematic study, or the scientific formation of libraries, and the field is thus narrowed down for the adventurous spirit who would aspire to guide other people on the highway of books. John Hill Burton, the learned and witty author of The Book-hunter, sums up the case for the specialist and browser with all the force and superior style which distinguishes your true Aberdonian from the common herd. Writing of Bibliographies, he observes: 'I come to another class of bibliographies, of which it is difficult to speak with patience—those which either profess to tell you how to find the best books to consult on every department of learning, or undertake to point out to you the books which you should select for your library, or for your miscellaneous reading. As to those who profess to be universal mentors, at hand to help you with the best tools for your work, in whichever department of intellectual labour it may happen to be, they break down at once. Whoever has set himself to any special line of investigation, cannot open one of those books without discovering its utter worthlessness and incapacity to aid him in his own speciality. As to the other class of bibliographers, who profess to act the guide, philosopher and friend to the collector and the reader, I cannot imagine anything more offensively audacious than the function they assume. It is an attempt of the pedagogue to assert a jurisdiction over grown intellects, and hence such books naturally develop in flagrant exaggeration the pragmatical priggism which is the pedagogue's characteristic defect. I would except from this condemnation a few bibliographers, who, instead of sitting in the schoolmaster's chair and dictating to you what it is proper that you should read, rather give you a sly hint that they are going a-vagabondising through the byways of literature, and will take you with them if you like.' This sweeping and, in its way, perfectly just condemation of selective bibliographies, applies to the class of guide which existed in 1862, when the Book-hunter first appeared, and might with equal propriety be extended to more recent efforts in the same field. But it cannot be held to apply to more than a few of the modern bibliographical guides, because to a very great extent criticism, personal preferences and the 'pragmatical priggism' of the average pedagogue have been eliminated. Instead, we have guides and aids to book-selection which are suggestive rather than aggressively dogmatic, and which are intended for ordinary mortals who make no pretension to book-learning or knowledge of book-classification. Undoubtedly such folks exist now, as they have in all times, who are glad to have a little guidance on any unfamiliar subject, from some one who knows a little more than themselves; and to such people, even an elementary and incomplete bibliography is often of immense service. What Burton's attitude might have been towards such an institution as the National Home Reading Union, it is impossible to say, but one may venture to guess that he would probably have described its work in uncomplimentary terms. Nevertheless, even Burton and those of the same self-possessed and self-sufficient cast of mind, who are inclined to scout the idea of obtaining help from the hints of others, would undoubtedly profit by some of the excellent and carefully compiled bibliographies which have appeared during the past twenty years. No one who has engaged in the work of library formation can afford to neglect the bibliographies and suggestions of other collectors, and he who is called upon to systematically build up a library of literature representative of all subjects, cannot stay and watch that delightfully haphazard assembling of choice treasures, which is the chief pleasure of the private collector or Burtonite. He must, on the contrary, seek out suitable authorities on many subjects, without waiting for them to drop, as bargains, from the clouds, and he must furthermore endeavour to anticipate the needs of the readers for whom the library is being formed. No doubt a leisured stroll through the many avenues of literature is a pleasing pastime, especially when, with dawdlings on the way, it occupies a lifetime; but, when ordinary mortals are clamouring for books of every conceivable kind, your modern library-builder cannot pause to choose with infinite deliberation and care. Personal tastes must be rigidly kept in subordination, and every effort made to select the best to satisfy the sober requirements or hobbies of other people; and for these sufficient reasons, gratitude, and not caustic criticism, must be bestowed on the bibliographers who till the sour and unprofitable fields of literature.


On these lines, this little book aspires to be a guide to those modest people who are not yet cocksure of their literary knowledge and taste, and who are not too proud to consider the suggestions of another book-lover. To such kindred spirits there is a certain measure of pleasurable excitement in running down old favourites in what may be considered a Book-Title Anthology, and even more delight in spotting omissions. There is little charm in absolutely perfect catalogues or anthologies, Your ideal works of this kind ought to have a great function to fulfil as stimulators of the error-hunter and instigators of that kind of research for omissions which gives pleasure to thousands of book-users. It will therefore be a double delight to the author of this book if it succeeds in satisfying, occasionally, the needs of the modest library-builder, while giving the ardent omission-hunter abundant scope for marginal remarks and interleaved annotations. The claims of the small library have been so greatly overshadowed by those of the more showy and, in many respects, more important large library, that comparatively little literature of a useful kind exists relating to book collections in their early stages as select and special private libraries of various kinds. By small library is meant the select general collection of books numbering from 200 to 5,000 volumes, such as may be gathered by students, schools, churches, commercial and industrial organizations, and all agencies in which books are either tools, or a valuable means of affording recreation. As a rule, such collections are formed without much regard to order or care in selection, and, save in the case of private collectors who specialize, the majority of small libraries are frequently a miscellaneous assemblage of odds and ends organized on very primitive methods. The same remarks apply with even greater force to many of the smaller Public Libraries of the country, because in them should be expected order and sound methods, instead of which disproportion, injudicious selection and feeble organization are the most prominent features. If any one is sufficiently curious and patient to study the catalogues of the average small British public or subscription library, he will be surprised at the numerous evidences of bad judgment in book-selection, the lack of proportion between class and class, author and author, subject and subject, and an entire absence of proper classification and intelligence in cataloguing. No attempt is made to keep in touch with modern scientific, artistic, historical, social or literary progress, no doubt because the limited funds available are expended in blindly providing current third-rate fiction or books of the hour. The ambition to place as many books on the shelves in the shortest space of time, is often responsible for the poor quality and unrepresentative character of the literature stocked by the average small library. Instead of purchasing with care and accepting donations with discrimination, such libraries practically swallow everything which comes along, whether in the shape of cheap lots or donations, and the result is a heterogeneous mass of books to which the title of library is wrongly applied.

Philosophers in various ages have informed us that a man may be recognized as regards his idiosyncrasies and habits by the company he keeps, the clothes he wears, the food he eats, and so on; but for the particular purpose of this work it is best that he be measured and judged by the books he stocks. It is very surprising, considering the vast number of books produced, how little real influence literature has on the life and concerns of the ordinary man. If journalistic literature be excluded, it is doubtful if books are used by more than one man in ten as they are intended to be used, namely, as machines or tools designed to simplify the multifarious details of every-day life. Take, for example, the case of the prosperous publican—or more politely, the Licensed Victualler—who is best equipped with the material means required for library formation. His library, as a general rule, is quite childlike and elementary in appearance, and resembles the ordinary nursery library in being composed of unbound journals or literature in pamphlet form. Indeed, the vast majority of private libraries have a more or less strongly marked resemblance to the library of the child in being an unkempt and ragged assemblage of unbound ephemera. So with the licensed victualler. He relies entirely on the daily newspapers for his literary food, with perhaps some more serious matter from a weekly trade journal and a dash of frivolity from the 'Pink 'Un'. But he makes no attempt to equip himself with books which would be of real value to him in the conduct of his business. He does not even acquire the elementary handbooks on the law of his trade, nor has he any particular interest in the books which chronicle its history. Instead of utilizing his commanding position as an associate of all kinds of men, and keeping himself to some extent acquainted with some of their hobbies, easily to be derived from certain useful books, he fritters away his time, money, and energy in cultivating the sportsman, the loafer, and the flash dandy, with never a thought to the influence he might exert if his mind were better furnished with the knowledge to be gained from books. In this respect he resembles hundreds of tradesmen, shopkeepers, and clerks, who do not even take the trouble to make themselves acquainted with the literature bearing on their trades. What is the library of the average suburban home? A Bible, some unbound illustrated magazines, and, as a concession to literary culture, a few yellow-back novels, generally of the sensational or tittle-tattle order. In many cases which have come under observation the clerk dwelling in Suburbia, or anywhere else, does not take the trouble to furnish himself with a manual of book-keeping or business method which would undoubtedly increase his range of knowledge and fit him for a better position, nor does it even occur to him to expend a few shillings on a book which might enable him to cultivate with better success his miserable scrap of a back-garden. Such men will spend pounds in constructing elaborate poultry hutches, and then proceed to devastate their stock, because they prefer the imperfect instructions or hints of friends, as wise as themselves, to the clear and simple directions to be found in any ordinary book on the management of fowls. Or, as is just as likely, they never dream of inquiring if any book on their particular trade or hobby exists. Even the Public Library has not yet eradicated the belief, prevalent in many minds, that books are not written on every conceivable subject. In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, if the habitual users of Public Libraries are excepted, no man or woman dreams of consulting books for even the most elementary information. It is extraordinary when one considers how ignorant a vast majority of the people are with regard to the valuable information stored in books, and how necessary it is, therefore, that the small library should be forced to become a more potent and influential factor in the daily life of the general public.


CHAPTER II

CHILDREN'S HOME LIBRARIES

The most elementary form of small library is that which belongs to the Baby who, as yet, has not acquired the art of reading. He or she—it matters little how they are named, as both are clad alike in petticoats and bibs—prefers the pictorial tale of love or glory, or treatise on natural history, or handbook to the labyrinth of the alphabet. Parents, as a rule, exercise very little care in the selection of the first toy-books for their children, if, indeed, they purchase any at all, and both children and parents are equally indifferent to the fate of the books during their brief and tumultuous existence. These are both fundamental mistakes in the training of the young. It is not only important that the most artistic and amusing picture-books should be chosen, but that some means should be taken to preserve the books from wanton destruction. It is bad enough to see a common, garish, and inartistic book being used to wipe the floor or thrash the fender, but it is positively criminal to allow the works of Walter Crane, Randolph Caldecott, and Kate Greenaway—to name no others—to be used in this cruel manner by youngsters who have not been taught to discriminate. In buying books for young children, therefore, care should be taken to select only those which have high artistic value, or which give accurate delineations of natural and familiar objects, rather than those cheap and nasty productions which in colour and design are second cousins to the mock valentines of our youth. It may be noted that, when a baby's interest in pictorial literature begins to abate, or to assume a destructive form, an old newspaper makes a most effective substitute for a picture-book. A baby brought up on artistic pictures is being insensibly endowed with a valuable perceptive faculty, which will have influential results in every process of future training. One who is reared on literary and pictorial trash will almost inevitably degenerate into a worshipper of the horse-hair and mahogany standard in life, culture and morals.

The pet fad of most American (and not a few English) librarians is the compilation of model selections of books suitable for children of all ages and temperaments. In many cases this special cult has resulted in the production of some extraordinary lists, in which books are graded or arranged in a series of classes to suit the supposed degree of intelligence possessed by boys and girls of five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, and twelve years of age. What is entertaining matter for the lad of twelve must needs, according to this scheme, be poison for his brother of eight, while girl-books are apparently regarded as quite a distinct class from boy-books. This shepherding and patronage of the young idea has attained appalling dimensions in the United States, and one of its most awful results has been the production of the phenomenally impertinent American boys and girls one meets on board Atlantic steamships, in hotels, and even in the streets of London and Edinburgh. Loud-voiced, assertive, impatient, quarrelsome, unlovable, and generally offensive youngsters, who are the production of graded schools, ’snappy' literature, boastful school histories, and unbridled licence at home. The marvel is what becomes of these youthful and genteel American hooligans in after-life, because outside the vulgar, go-ahead commercial circles, one seldom meets among adults with the awful manners so characteristic of the American child. All this may be taken as a warning against forcing the minds of children by artificial educational processes. If this grading of books were executed on thoroughly scientific lines, it might be possible to regard it with some interest, but the mere grouping of books by some mature mind into grades considered suitable for children five years old, ten years old, and so on, is a positive delusion. No allowance is made in such lists for variation in the intelligence of children, and the American graded lists of books are on a par with English Elementary School standards as regards their adaptability to special cases. One can imagine the kind, but watchful, American lady-librarian saying to a boy of eight: 'My dear child, you mustn't take this book to read; it is reserved for boys twelve years old, and might cause you to strain your mental outfit!' If, however, the books were classified in some such order as the following, one could appreciate the attempt to suit literature to its appropriate readers, especially if all children were branded with their mental endowments, after examination in a psychological laboratory:—

The Classification of Child Readers. A0. Three-ounce brain child General

A1. Three-ounce brain child plus Philosophical temperament.

A2. Three-ounce brain child „ Religious „

A5. Three-ounce brain child „ Scientific „

A6. Three-ounce brain child „ Mechanical „

A7. Three-ounce brain child „ Artistic „

A8. Three-ounce brain child „ Imaginative „

B0. Three and a half-ounce brain child General

B1. Three and a half-ounce brain child plus Imaginative temperament.

C2. Four-ounce brain child „ Religious „

This scheme avoids the utterly fallacious theory, codified in American and British catalogues and educational standards, that intelligence goes with age, while it gives abundant scope for psychological diagnosis by those experts in mental physiology who profess to measure up a man's idiosyncrasies by the twist of his toes or the cock of his eyes. Whether vivisection would be a necessary part of the process, only experts can decide!

The attempt to classify books into grades, to suit the supposed tastes and mental abilities of children of various ages whose minds are awakening to activity and acquiring powers of observation, is a complete mistake. So is the plan of separating books for boys and girls, or setting aside those of a low literary quality, but undeniably moral tone, for juvenile consumption. The whole policy of directing the reading of children in grooves, according to some standard, fixed maybe by an unsympathetic adult, is an insult to the intelligence and humanity which reside in boys and girls, however much they may be concealed under the inanities their parents teach them. No doubt some of the mistaken notions as to the possibility of suiting books to ages have arisen from the frequent inquiries which present-giving relatives address to booksellers when they want books suitable for children of a certain age. To meet this demand, certain semi-religious, semi-commercial publishing houses have issued hundreds of tons of books based on the age-limit fetish.

In selecting books for the use of boys and girls, or, in other words, forming a small juvenile library, it is well to avoid most of the literature professedly written for youth, and published at preposterous prices by discerning publishers, who manufacture this gilded rubbish with an eye to the rich uncle rather than to the poor parent or still poorer child. Why children's books should be so expensive, and in proportion to their utility, such a costly class of literature, is one of those puzzles which only publishers can answer. There is comfort in the thought, however, that the majority of the gorgeous and expensively-produced children's books, are not very influential, though they may be cherished on account of their sumptuous bindings. In forming a Children's Home Library it is well to avoid the recommendations of all the specialists who have written guides to selection, or compiled lists of the best twenty, fifty, or hundred books for young readers. Some of these lists are of enormous size, embracing all classes of literature, and including much that is unsuitable for the purpose of the juvenile section of a small Household Library. Ignoring, then, all expert help of this kind, the question has to be considered—what should be provided for the children's library of an ordinary household ? There are certain classes of literature which may be excluded forthwith, not only because they are unattractive and unsuitable, but because they can generally be obtained from any Public Library. This at once disposes of classes like Theology, Mathematical Science, Sociology, Philology, and to a certain extent History and Geography. Biography is also of doubtful value or interest. The 'self-help' and 'pursuit of knowledge under difficulties' kind of literature, which urges us to profit by the example of great natural geniuses who have become famous, is not, on the whole, so salutary as many suppose. It has much the same effect on the minds of healthy and spirited boys and girls as perpetual injunctions to model their deportment and behaviour on some paragon youth or maiden whose conduct is the admiration of all the conventional mothers of a large neighbourhood. Nothing is more repulsive to any healthy-minded youngster than to have these incarnations of all the namby-pamby little virtues set up as patterns for imitation. So exemplary biography is, on the whole, rather a fetish, and calculated to make the 'men who have made themselves' unpopular, and the record of their deeds a wearisome grind. Popular accounts of voyages and travels, and historical books like Scott's Tales of a Grandfather, are on quite another level, and, if such works were not to be had in abundance in Public Libraries, it would be necessary to specify a few. But this part of the subject only proposes to touch the question of good and suitable books for small home libraries, and not that of furnishing larger and more general collections. The most desirable books for a small Children's Home Library are those which can be used by generation after generation of youngsters without becoming tiresome, and which the same child can read over and over again without much loss of interest. In other words, books which have proved their power to interest and even instruct children, by awakening their perceptive faculties, through many years of existence. Imaginative literature, particularly in a prose form, seems to be the class which proves most permanently attractive to all kinds of children. There is an immense field from which selection can be made, but for the purpose of the kind of library now in view the following suggestions of titles are confined to works which have been adopted throughout the English-speaking if not the whole civilized world. Books by such writers as Ballantyne, Fenn, Henty, Mayne Reid, Kingston, and Verne are purposely excluded. They belong distinctly to the gift-book class of literature, which is the province of the rich uncle, besides being contained—generally very completely—in the easily accessible Public Libraries. Omitting these, and such hopelessly 'improving' and impossible books as Sandford and Merton, Swiss Family Robinson, The Fairchild Family, etc., we get various books which are as necessary to a well-ordered household as chairs:—


Æsop. Fables.

Andersen. Fairy Tales.

Arabian Nights.

Bunyan. Pilgrim's Progress.

Burnett. Little Lord Fauntleroy.

Carroll. Alice in Wonderland.

——Through the Looking-glass.

Defoe. Robinson Crusoe.

Dickens. Christmas Books.

Grimm. Household Tales.

Hughes. Tom Brown's Schooldays.

Kipling. Jungle Books.

Lamb. Tales from Shakespeare.

Scott. Ivanhoe.

Stevenson. Treasure Island.

Stowe. Uncle Tom's Cabin.

Swift. Gulliver's Travels.

Twain. Tom Sawyer.

Jacobs. English Fairy Tales.

Lang's Fairy Books, (Any colour.)

Halliwell-Phillips, Nursery Rhymes and Fairy Tales.

Palgrave's Children's Treasury of Poetry.

Hutchison. Indoor Games.

——Outdoor Games.


This list contains much that is of great value and interest for children, as well as adults. Indeed, it is very doubtful if Carroll's 'Alice' books are not really grown-up children's books. Many children care little for their elaborate fooling, though they politely acquiesce in the enthusiastic appreciation of their parents. There are others which may be regarded as more suitable for adults, but a long experience has convinced the writer that practically any good book possessing literary merit is suitable equally for old men of seventy and young boys of ten, provided they have any intelligence at all. The list above is merely a suggested beginning for a juvenile home library. It can be increased to almost any extent, and it will be supplemented on many other sides by the adult departments of the small Household Library yet to be considered. Every house ought to contain the whole or most of these books. The game and recreation books are mentioned because they are practical, and describe minor handicrafts as well as sports. The collections of fairy tales by Jacobs, Lang, etc., are also important. The child who reads the book version of Jack the Giant-Killer, and afterwards is taken to see it in pantomime form, will have acquired a valuable lesson in the deceitfulness of appearances which will last him through life, and endow him with a critical caution which will aid him in discriminating between realities and shams.

The lists given below and those submitted in Chapter V—'The School Library', contain a larger provision of suitable books for children of all ages, and some of those, especially in the Nursery book department, may be chosen for household as well as for school use.


LIST OF BOOKS FOR VERY YOUNG CHILDREN.


Adams (F.) illust. Story of little Jack Sprat; col. ill.

Æsop, Baby's own Æsop; col. ill. by W. Crane.

—Fables; ed. by Jacobs.

—Fables; told to the children by Lena Dalkeith; ill.

—Hundred Fables; ill. by P. J. Billinghurst.

—Fabeln für die Jugend; ill. by C. Votteler. [German text.]

Animal Book: A Natural History for Little Folk.

Arnim. April Baby's Book of Tunes; ill. by K. Greenaway.

Arnold's Continuous Readers.

Baring-Gould (S.). Amazing Adventures; col. ill. by H. B. Neilson.

—Nursery Songs and Rhymes.

Baum (L. F.). Mother Goose in Prose; ill.

Begbie (H.). Bundy in the Greenwood; ill.

—Bundy on the Sea. ill.

'Belgian Hare' Tales with a Twist; col. ill.

Bell (J. J.). Jack of all Trades; col. ill. by C. Robinson.

—New Noah's Ark; col. ill.

Bell's Continuous Readers.

Big Animal Picture Book; col. ill.

Bilderbuch fur kleine Mâdchen: alte Kinderreime; col. ill. [German text.]

Billinghurst (P. J.). illust. Hundred Anecdotes of Animals; ill.

Bingham (C.). Animal's Academy; ill. by Hy. B. Neilson.

Bird (R.). Jesus the Carpenter of Nazareth; ill.

—One Hundred Bible Stories for Children; ill.

Blackie's Children's Annual.

Boelitz (M.), ed. Schöne alte Kinderlieder; col. ill. [German text.]

Bonser (A. E.). Kings of the Forest ; col, ill.

Books for the Bairns Series; ed. by W. T. Stead.

Bo-peep.

Bo-peep Series; pub. by Classell; col. ill.

Brabourne (Lord). Friends and Foes from Fairyland; ill.

—Moonshine; ill.

Braine (S.). Sparks from the Nursery Fire: rhymes; col. ill.

Bremner (Kate F.). Book of Song Games and Ball Games; ill. diagrams.

'Brenda.' See Smith (Mrs. Castle).

Brés (Mlle. H.-S.). Mon historie de France; ill. [French text.]

—Mon histoire naturelle; ill. [French text.]

—Mon premier alphabet, lecture et écriture; ill. [French text.]

—Mon premier tour du monde. [French text]; col. ill.

Brett (David). Nursery Book; col. ill. by D. B.

Bridgman (C.). The Bairn's Coronation Book; col. ill. by C. Robinson.

Bridgman (C.) A Book of Days for Little Ones; col. ill. by C. Robinson.

—The Shopping Day; col. ill. by C. Robinson.

Brown (A. F.). Book of Saints and Friendly Beasts; ill.

Brown (J.). Rab and his Friends; ill.

Browne (G.), illust. Dr. Jollyboy's A.B.C.

Browne (M.). Sunday Stories for Small People; ill.

Brymer (John). Gammon and Spinach; col. ill. by S. Orr.

Bunyan (John). Pilgrim's Progress; ed. by Lang.

Burgess (G.). Goops and how to be them; ill.

Buttercupes and Daisies: Stories and Pictures.

Caldecott (R.), illust. Collection of Pictures and Songs. 2 vols., col. ill.

—Hey-diddle-diddle Picture-Book.

—Panjandrum Picture-Book.

Canton (W.). A Child's Book of Saints; ill.

Carrington (Edith). True Stories about Animals; col. ill.

Chadburn (Mabel). The Fairy-bird and Piggywig; ill.

Chatterbox.

Child's Own Magazine.

Child's Own Story-book.

Chisholm (L.), ed. Nursery Rhymes; ill.

Cim (Albert). Spectacles enfantins; ill. by Gerbault and Job. [French text.]

Clements (M. E.). Bible Stories Simply Told; ill.

Copeland (Walter). The Book of the Zoo; col. ill. by C. Robinson.

—— Farm-book for Little Ones; col. ill. by C. Robinson.

—— The Awful Airship; col. ill. by C. Robinson.

—— The Silly Submarine; col. ill. by C. Robinson.

—— The mad motor; col. ill. by C. Robinson.

Corbet (S. & K.). Sybil's Garden of Pleasant Beasts; col. ill.

Crane (W.) ed. The Baby's Opera . . .; ill. by W. C.

——The Baby's Bouquet (companion to Baby's Opera); ill. by W. C.

—— Beauty and the Beast Picture-book; col. ill. by W. C.

—— Bluebeard's Picture-book; col. ill. by W. C.

—— Cinderella's Picture-book; col. ill. by W. C.

—— Flora's Feast: a Masque of Flowers; col. ill. by W. C.

—— Goody Two Shoes' Picture-book; col. ill. by W. C.

—— Old Mother Hubbard: her Picture-book; col. ill. by W. C.

—— Red Riding Hood's Picture-book; col. ill. by W. C.

Crane (W.) ed. This little Pig; col. ill. by W. C.

—— See also Lamb.

Darling's Delight: short stories.

Darton ed. Sunday Pleasure-book; ill.

Day (T.). Sandford and Merton in words of one syllable, by Mary Godolphin.

Defoe (D.). Robinson Crusoe, in words of one syllable, by Mary Godolphin.

Deutsch-Englisches Bilderbuch [German-English and English-German text]; col. ill.

Dodge (M. M.). Baby World.

—— New Baby World.

—— Rhymes and Jingles.

—— When Life is Young.

Dotteler (C.) illust. Buntes A.B.C.; col. ill. [German text.]

Ducoudray (G.). Cents récits d'histoire de France; ill. [French text.]

Dumas (A.). La Bouillie de la Comtesse Berthe; ill. by Bertall. [French text.]

Faithful Friends: pictures and stories; col. ill.

Fallon (S. W. M.). Animal Alphabet Book; ill.

Farrow (G. E.). An A.B.C. of Everyday People, Good, Bad and Indifferent; ill. by John Hassall.

—— Round the World A.B.C.; ill. by John Hassall. Favourite Story-book; col. ill.

Favourite Story-book.

Fenn (G. Manville) and others. Little People's Book of Wild Animals; coll. ill.

Feuillet (O.). Vie de Polichinelle . . .; ill. by Bertall. [French text.]

Field (E.). Lullaby Land: Songs of Childhood; ill. by C. Robinson.

For Very Little Folk; by 'Aunt Louisa`'.

Ford (Robert). Children's Rhymes, Games, Songs and Stories. ill.

—— ed. Ballads of Babyland: English and American.

Foster (C.). Story of the Bible in Simple Language; ill.

'France, A.' Filles et garcons scenes de la ville et des champs [French text]; ill. by M. B. de Monvell.

—— Nos enfants [French text]; ill. by M. B. de Monvell.

Gomme (Alice B.). Old English Singing Games; col. ill.

Greenaway (K.). A Apple Pie; col. ill.

—— Book of Games.

—— A Day in a Child's Life: music by M. B. Forster.

—— Marigold Garden; col. ill.

—— Under the Window; col. ill.

Greenaway (K.). See also Arnim and Taylor.

Grimm. Fairy Tales for Little Folk; col. ill.

Groser (H. G.). Little Folks' Land: verses.

Hamer (S. H.). Set.

—— and H. Rountree. Menagerie Series (set): ill. by Harry Neilson and Lewis Baumer.

Hardy (E. S.) illust. A Book for Little People; col. ill.

—— Nursery Rhymes; ill.

Haskell (Mrs. L.). Stories from the Bible; ill.

Hassall (John), illust. Dear old Nursery Tales; col. ill.

—— Favourite Nursery Tales; col. ill.

—— My Book of Nursery Rhymes; col. ill.

Hawthorne (N.). Wonder Book.

Hay (Helen). The Little Boy Book; col. ill. by F. Ver Beck.

Hendry (H.). Red Apples and Silver Bells; ill.

Hepburn (T. N.) 'Gabriel Setoun' pseud. The Child world; ill. by C. Robinson.

Herford (O.). Artful Anticks; ill.

—— Child's Primer of Natural History: ill. by O. H.

Hicks (S.) and A. Hopwood. Bluebell and the Sleepy Ring.

Hocking (S. K.). Her Benny.

Hoffmann (F.). Märchen und fabeln für Kinder [German text] col. ill.

Hoffmann (H.). Prinz Grünewald und Perlenfein; col. ill. by H. H. [German text.]

—— Der Struwwelpeter; col. ill. by H. H. [German text.]

—— Struwwelpeter … ; col. ill. ny H. H. [English text.]

Holiday Picture-book.

Hutton (E.) ed. Children's Christmas Treasury of Things New and Old; col. ill.

Jackson (H.) Gentle Jesus: Life of Christ for Little Folk; col. ill.

Jacobs (J.) Celtic Fairy Tales.

—— English Fairy Tales.

Jacquin (J.). Les Animaux en pique-nique [French text]; ill. by G. H. Thompson.

Jerrold (w.) ed. Big Book of Nursery Rhymes; ill. by C. Robinson.

—— Nonsense, Nonsense! col. ill. by C. Robinson.

Jones (Harry). Prince Boohoo and Little Smuts; ill.

Kemble (E. W.) illust. Kemble's Coons (ill. only).

King-Hall (E.) Adventures in Toyland.

La Fontaine (J. de). Fables.

—— A Hundred Fables; ill by P. J. Billinghurst.

Lamb (Charles). A Masque of Days from the Last Essays of 'Elia'; newly … decorated by Walter Crane; ill.

Lang (A.) ed. Nursery Rhyme Book; ill. by L. L. Brooke.

Lear (E.). Book of Nonsense; ill.

—— More Nonsense; ill.

—— Nonsense Botany and Alphabet; ill.

—— Nonsense Songs; ill.

Lemonnier (C.). Bébés et joujoux (Premières lectures de l'enfance); ill. [French text.]

Little Folks' Christmas Volume; ill. (pub. by Cassell)

Little Folks' Series; ill. (pub. by Cassell).

Little Nursery Series; ill.

Little People's Scrap-book; col. ill.

Lohmeyer (J.) and E. Bormann. Reineke Fuchs; col. ill. by F. Flinzer.

Longmans' Continuous Readers:—

—— Cinderella.

—— History of Whittington.

—— Jack the Giant Killer.

—— Princess on the Glass Hill.

Mack (R.). Mary's Meadow: verses; col. ill.

Mein erstes Bilderbuch [German text] (chiefly illustrations).

Minnsen (B) ed. Book of French Song for the Young; ill. by T. H. Robinson. [French text.]

Mr. Punch's Book for Children; ed. by C. Pears: col. ill.

—— New Book for Children; ed. by C. Pears; col. ill.

—— Children's Book; ed. by E. V. Lucas; col. ill.

Mitchell (E.). Chuckabiddy Stories; ill. by N. E. Handy.

Molesworth (Mrs.). Set.

Mother Goose's Nursery Rhymes; col. ill. by Mabel Chadburn.

—— Nursery Rhymes; ill. by F. Opper.

—— Nursery Rhymes and Fairy Tales; ill. by Sir J. Gilbert and others.

—— See also Baum.

My Best Picture-book; ill.

My Book of True Stories; col. ill.

My Own Picture-book.

My Week-day Picture-book.

Neilson (Hy. B.) illust. An Animal A. B. C.

—— Jolly Jumbo; text by C. Bingham; col. ill.

Nesbit (E.). Story of the Five Rebellious Dolls; col. ill.

—— and others, Little People's Books of Fun; ill.

Nicholson (Wm.) illust. An Alphabet; col. ill.

—— Square Book of Animals; rhymes by A. Waugh; col. ill.

A 'Nobody's' Scrap-book; col. ill.

—— Nonsense for Somebody … ; written by a Nobody.

—— Some more Nonsense.

Nodier (C.). Trésor des Fèves et Fleur des Pois. … ; ill. [French text.]

O'Shea. Six Nursery Classics.

Our Darlings: pictures and stories.

Our Darling's First Book; ill.

Our Little Dots; ill.

Our Little People's Book; ill.

Outcault (R. F.). Buster Brown …; col. ill.

Ozaki (Yei T.) Japanese Fairy-book; ill.

Peary (Mrs.). Children of the Arctic; ill.

Perrault (C.) and others. Contes de fées; ill. by Berall. [French text.]

Picture-book of Animals …; col. ill. by Specht.

Playful Pets; col. ill.

Plunket (E. M.). Very Short Stories in Very Short Words.

—————— Comp. Merrie Games in Rhyme from ye Olden Time; ill.

Potter (Beatrix). Set.

Poulsson (E.) Child Stories and Rhymes …

Praeger (S. K.). Child's Picture Grammar; col. ill.

Premier livre des petits enfants: alphabet complet [French text]: ill. (Les premières lectures de l'enfance).

Pretty Pictures for Little Pets.

The Prize.

'Quatrelles.' Histoire de l'intrépide Capitaine Castagnette; ill. by G. Doré. [French text.]

Rands (W. B.). Lilliput Lyrics; ill. by C. Robinson.

Readers. See Arnold, Bell, Longmans.

Red Nursery Library; pub. by S.S.U.

Red Riding Hood.

Reynard the Fox: the Crafty Courier; in words of one syllable by S. P. Day; ill.

Rhymes for You and Me; ill. (Children's favourite ser.)

Riley (J. W.). Rhymes of Childhood.

Robbins (L.). Dutch Doll Ditties; ill. by C. Bingham.

Robinson (Phil.) Bubble and Squeak …; ill.

The Rosebud Annual.

Rossetti (C. G.). Singsong: a Nursery Rhyme Book; ill. by A. Hughes.

Rountree (Hy.) Animal Game Book; ill.

—— See also Hamer.

Saintsbury (G.) ed. National Rhymes of the Nursery; ill. by G. Browne.

Schmidt (C. von). Contes pour les …; ill. by Bertall. [French text.]

'Setoun (Gabriel)' pseud. See Hepburn.

Shepherd (J. A.). Zigzag Fables; col. ill.

Smith (Mrs. C.). 'Brenda'. Froggy's Little Brother.

—— Nothing to Nobody.

Smith (Fred). The Animal Book; ill. by Specht.

Smith (Hannah). 'Hesba Stretton'. Jessica's First Prayer.

—— Little Meg's children.

—— Alone in London.

Sonntag (H.). Magic Ring of Music: intro. to the study of music, adapted to young children. Music.

Stead (W. T.) ed. Books for the Bairns Ser.

Stevenson (R. L.). Child's Garden of Verses; ill. by C. Robinson.

Stories to Read.

The Story Album of Animals; ill.

'Stretton, Hesba.' Sea Smith (Hannah).

Tabor (E.). Set (pub. anon. When I was a little Girl, and others).

Tales and Talks about Animals; col. ill.

Tales for Our Darlings.

Tales for Tiny Tots.

Taylor (Jane and Ane). Little Anne; col. ill. by K. Greenaway.

Tell me a Story.

Tennyson (H.). Jack and the Beanstalk; ill. by R. Caldecott.

Thomson (Hugh) illust. Jack the Giant Killer.

Thorley (E. J.). An Alphabet; ill.

'Tip-Cat' pseud. Amy.

Tournier (L.). Les premiers chants: poesies [French text]; ill.

The Train Scrap-book (col. ill. only).

Upton (B.). The Golliwog Series.

Verbeek (G.). The Upside-downs of little Lady Lovekins and old man Muffaroo; ill.

Wallace-Dunlop (M.) and M. Rivett Carnac. Fairies, Elves and Flower-babies; ill.

Watson (E. M.) and others. Once upon a time: favourite nursery tales; ill.

Weatherly (F. E.). Book of Gnomes; ill. by E. S. Hardy.

Webb (W. Trego). Book of Bad Children; ill. (Little blue books.)

Weber (E.) ed. Neue Kinderlieder [German text]: col. ill.

Weedon (L. L.). Nursery Tales; ill.

Whyte (C. G.). Adventures of Merrywink.

Wyss (J. R.). Swiss Family Robinson; ed. by M. Godolphin (one syllable).


CHAPTER III

THE HOUSEHOLD LIBRARY

Every intelligent man, whether an enthusiastic book-lover or not, recognizes that books should form part of the fittings of every room in a house. Whether the apartment be a library, study, parlour, nursery, drawing-room, kitchen, bedroom, dining-room, boudoir, hall, or den, books of a suitable kind should form part of its equipment. There is much to be said in favour of gathering the book-wealth of a household together in one place, but there are practical inconveniences connected with this course which make it undesirable. If all the books are in the 'Library' one has to endure the nuisance of demands for particular works, coming from the kitchen, drawing-room, or bedroom, and the difficulty of securing their prompt and accurate return. It also imposes upon the butler, the maid-of-all-work, or whoever admits and attends upon callers, the awful responsibility of procuring from the library a pass-time book to amuse the waiting visitor in the drawing-room. This might easily lead to frightful complications, as, for example, an author receiving a presentation copy of his own work uncut, or scribbled over with sarcastic annotations. On the whole, there are too many practical disadvantages about the concentration plan to make it generally acceptable. On the other hand, a bedroom is not a suitable place for books, unless in the case of people living in lodgings. In the first place, wise to encourage the habit of reading in bed, or of reading when one ought to be sleeping? Again, in cases of illness, particularly when infectious, the is it stripping of the room, disinfection, and other disturbing processes, make bedrooms unsuitable places for the permanent storage of books. But on this point, every householder must be a law unto him or herself, as also on other points, such as the desirability of placing books in the scullery or coal-cellar.

A somewhat extensive and careful inquiry shows that the general reference library of the average British householder is not only incomplete, but in most cases non-existent. In dozens of cases, he does not possess a single reference book of any kind, and in a majority of cases which have come under notice, the household reference library consists of a solitary school dictionary of the English language. In a few cases houses are also found boasting of a cookery-book, issued free by an enterprising firm of sauce manufacturers, in which, by an extraordinary coincidence, the one thing needful to the success of a dish, is a dash of one or other of the firm's productions. There are also houses which preserve as literature the almanacks containing recipes and testimonials, issued by various vendors of quack medicines, and there is no doubt that the gullible British householder will accept almost anything which is sufficiently advertised and boomed, provided it is free. But of good, general reference books, which answer nearly every question likely to arise in an ordinary household, either from arguments in the family, the suggestions of friends, or the discussions of newspapers, the majority of British families do not possess many. It is chiefly because of this, and an extraordinary failure to make intelligent use of the reference departments of Public Libraries, that so much ignorance is manifested by the average British citizen, on nearly every subject under the sun. He addresses queries to the newspapers on topics which he could answer for himself by using his own home library, if he had one; or inquiring at the nearest Public Library. But, instead of equipping himself with the tools of knowledge for the benefit of himself or his family, he prefers to grope blindly along in his own pigheaded way, like his fathers before him, a prey to every intelligent American or German who cares to take advantage of his blunt indifference to the power and value of book-learning. It is laughable, though it is also pitiful, to observe such foolish persons asking the same old questions in the same old way, over and over again, as if answers to them had not been placed on permanent record time after time. The value of a small Home Reference Library is simply enormous, and its possessor is rendered superior to the little perplexities and difficulties of life, which constantly occur to embarrass man who will not expend a little money to provide a few necessary books. Cases are on record of persons who have starved themselves in order to 'save up' for a sideboard, in which to store a few wedding presents and half a dozen bottles of soda-water; their ignorance, the while, of every vital fact of live being such, through neglect of the information contained in books, that they were incompetent to take part in a discussion on any subject. It is extraordinary to what an extent shrewd and naturally intelligent business men will speak about literature as frivolous and not worth consideration in the struggle for life. By literature they seem to recognize only novels and poetry; never, as a rule, the books in which are recorded the world's history; the facts of life as seen by successive observers; the technique, history and special advantages of every trade, process or profession; the wisdom of the world's best men; in short, the only permanent records of what has already been accomplished by human beings in every department of life. They will make the cheap, inaccurate, and ephemeral information dispensed by the newspaper serve their turn, and from it they will take their politics, religion, and tips for financial speculations. Now, this is not as it should be, in a country which is threatened on every side by serious competition, in spite of the educational facilities provided by the State. It is not enough to have books on view at Public Libraries. In a critical time like the present, when intelligence and knowledge are at a premium, it is just as important that every householder should possess certain books for himself, and learn how to use them. The best reference books for a Household Library are those which will give the most frequently wanted information in the most accessible manner. Leaving out purely professional books, which every householder must procure to meet his own requirements, the following is a brief list of absolutely indispensable books, which should be found in every British home, both for the adult and scholar members of the family:—

A Minimum Household Reference Library.


A good Dictionary of the English Language.

A good general Gazetteer.

A good Geographical Atlas.

A Biographical Dictionary (general).

A good Arithmetic.

A Medical Dictionary (Domestic medicine).

A Nursing Manual.

A good Cookery Book.

A Manual of Domestic Economy.

A Manual of Natural History.


This minimum list comprises most of the books which will answer nearly all everyday questions, and the works contained in it should be found in every British home, from the lowest to the highest. The total cost of such a collection will vary with the editions or special books chosen, and as there are hundreds of different books on each one of the subjects, the difficulty of selection is great. To a librarian this difficulty is magnified by the danger of appearing unfair or invidious by selecting one special book for mention out of so many. Without giving any expression of opinion as to the surpassing quality of the books recommended, a list of cheap books is subjoined on the subjects noted, which almost every workman can buy in a short time, and a list of more expensive books on the same subjects, well within the means of every middle-class household. From these suggestions any one can make a selection:—

*Nuttall's English Dictionary. 3s. 6d. Warne.

Annandale's English Dictionary. 5s. Blackie.

*Chamber's Concise Gazetteer of the World. 6s. Chambers.

Chisholm. Gazetteer of the World. 17s. 6d. Times Office.

Cassell's Universal Atlas. 30s. Cassell.

*Bartholomew's Century Atlas and Gazetteer. 3s. 6d. Walker.

Patrick. Biographical Dictionary. 10s. 6d. Chambers.

*Brooksmith. Arithmetic. 4s. 6d. Macmillan.

Thomson and Steel. Domestic Medicine. 10s. 6d. Griffin.

*Mackenzie. Home Medicine. 1s. Gill.

*Wood (C. J.). Nursing for the Home and the Hospital. 1s. 6d. Cassel

Harrison (Eveleen). Home Nursing. 4s. 6d. Macmillan.

*Cassell's Cookery Book. 1s. Cassell.

Cassell's Dictionary of Cookery. 5s. Cassell.

Beeton's Household Management. 7s. 6d. Ward, Lock & Co.

*Barnett and O'Neill. Domestic Economy. 1s. Macmillan.

*Wood. Natural History. 3s. 6d. Routledge.

Lydekker. Concise Knowledge Natural History. 5s.


The books marked * are published at less than 30s., but as most of them are subject to at least 25 per cent. discount, they can be purchased from almost any bookseller for less than 20s. This, then, is the minimum reference library which every British house-holder should possess. There is great need for a general biographical dictionary less in size and price than Chambers' very excellent work mentioned above, and a biographical dictionary about 5s., giving essential facts and dates only, is a good speculation for any publisher.

For householders who can afford to furnish their reference libraries more completely, the following supplementary list of books is recommended:—

Chamber's Encyclopædia. 10 vols. £5.

Haydn's Dictionary of Dates. Last edition.

Who's Who. (Contemporary Biography.) To be got occasionally.

Hazell's Annual. To be got occasionally.

Whitaker's Almanack. 1s. Annually.

A Book of Recipes. (Cooley's is good, but expensive.)

A History of England. (Green.)

A History of Scotland. (Say Hume Brown.)

A History of Ireland. (Say Walpole.)

A History of the World. (Sanderson.)

Dictionaries of Latin, French and German.

A Collection of Poetry. (Say Palgrave's Golden Treasury.)

A Collection of Quotations. (Bartlett 3s. 6d., or Wood 7s. 6d.)


There are many other books which could be named, but these must wait till the question of stocking larger libraries is under consideration.

In the suggestions made above, there is considerable scope for an enterprising bookseller in association with a cabinet-maker. When a young couple start housekeeping, they generally buy a considerable number of articles of furniture which are seldom used. Their purpose is mainly decorative, and there would be considerable wisdom in substituting for these comparatively useless cabinets, ottomans, hall-stands, lamps, screens, and whatnots, a suitable bookcase fitted with some of the books already recommended. A reference library, however small, is infinitely more valuable than numerous pieces of useless furniture, which are usually purchased more out of regard for convention than necessity or utility. Here, then, is a suggestion for some enterprising firm, to prepare and sell in combination the nucleus of a Household Reference Library, stored in suitable cabinets according to size.

Before leaving the subject of the Household Library it will be necessary to consider what provision should be made for the general book collecttion in houses of moderate size. Houses possessing large libraries as heirlooms are naturally ruled out in such a survey, as are also those formed by certain millionaires at so much the foot run for books and binding. In addition to certain necessary reference and juvenile books, such as those already mentioned, every house should possess a general collection of literature of a varied character and on different subjects, including a large selection of good fiction. In the formation of such a collection, the taste and preferences of the collector must be the sole guides. It is a thankless task making out lists of so-called 'Best Books', as aids to selection, because opinions differ so much, and compilers look at the question from so many standpoints. The useful, but huge, lists of Mr. Swan Sonnenschein are at one end of the row, and the select lists of fifty or a hundred best books, compiled by Lord Avebury (when Sir John Lubbock) and many others, are at the other extreme. Some of these selections are useful as suggestions, but most of the smaller lists are overburdened by a straining after what is regarded as high literary quality, which makes them very austere and forbidding. Lord Avebury's List of a Hundred Books, for example, contains many items which are unsuited for a general household library, or indeed for the library of any one save the special student. It aims too high, and is dull and impractical in consequence. Most of the other select lists published are marred by the same defects. They are efforts to show the compiler's catholicity and profundity rather than practical attempts to direct attention to good books which will instruct, elevate, and divert. Imagine any one, after a hard day's work in an office or factory, coming home to read Wake's Apostolic Fathers or Bacon's Novum Organum! There is a limit to human endurance in the task of reading for instruction's sake alone, and it is reached when lists of good books are drawn chiefly from pagan philosophers and divers religious cranks of varying degrees of interest and value. The books which will interest most people are those which make some kind of direct appeal to their humanity, idea of beauty, or desire for special knowledge. Most popular books must have merits of a very substantial or peculiar kind to ensure their longevity, otherwise it would be impossible to account for the appearance of edition after edition of certain works. Enterprising booming is not the only reason for the success of any book, especially when it is an old one published before puffing journalism became a force. For these reasons, a list of titles is here offered, on lines which differ materially from those adopted by most previous selectors. It is not an attempt to guide the book-collector, nor an effort to dictate to the gatherer of a Household Library what is best in all literature to select; but simply a series of suggestions which may aid the ordinary citizen, not specially skilled in book-knowledge, to make up his mind to form a library of reasonable quality and utility. The list is frankly a Philistine one, which will probably meet with the disapprobation of those devotees of the written word who regard fine writing as the beginning and end of all literature. Nevertheless, it is a very practical one, covering the popular side of most subjects, and including a body of imaginative literature which no household need be ashamed to possess. The bulk of the works are those which enjoy great and continuous popularity in Public Libraries, many of them are classics, a few are included because of their historical value, and every book is interesting. From this series of suggestions, any householder can gradually build up his Home Library, varying the selection to meet his own views or tastes, and omitting anything which may seem unsuitable.


SUGGESTIONS FOR A GENERAL HOUSEHOLD

LIBRARY.

Science.


Ball. Story of the Heavens.

Bates. Naturalist on the Amazons.

Bettany. The World's Inhabitants.

Buckley. History of Natural Science.

Burroughs. Wake Robin.

Clodd. Story of Creation.

Darwin. Descent of Man.

Faraday. Chemical History of a Candle.

Furneaux. The Out-door World.

Huxley. Physiology.

Jefferies. Life of the Fields.

Johnston. Chemistry of Common Life.

Lyell. Elements of Geology.

Mivart. Groundwork of Science.

Rodway. In the Guiana Forest.

Step. Wayside Blossoms.

Thoreau. Walden.

Tyndall. Fragments of Science.

Wallace. Island Life.

White. Natural History of Selborne.


Useful and Fine Arts.


Bohn. Handbook of Games.

Boutell. British Archeology.

Drury. Book of Gardening.

Fletcher. History of Architecture.

Inman. Preservation of Health.

Matthew. Musical History.

Richardson. Diseases of Modern Life.

Robinson. English Flower Garden.

Routledge. Discoveries and Inventions.

Ruskin. Art of England.

—— Lectures on Art.

—— Seven Lamps of Architecture.

Walton-Cotton. Compleat Angler.


Philosophy, Religion, and Sociology.


Blackie. Self-culture.

Burton. Anatomy of Melancholy.

Cobbett. Advice to Young Men.

Drummond. Natural Law in Spiritual World.

Jevons. Principles of Science.

à Kempis. Imitation of Christ.

Kidd. Social Evolution.

Lewes. History of Philosophy.

Marcus Aurelius. Thoughts.

Montesquieu. Spirit of Laws.

Morison. Service of Man.

Plato. Republic (Golden Treasury).

Robertson. Elements of Philosophy.

Smiles. Self-help.

Smith. Wealth of Nations.

Spencer. Education.

—— Study of Sociology.

Taylor. Holy Living and Dying.


History and Travel.


Borrow. Bible in Spain.

Brassey. Voyages in the 'Sunbeam'.

Bryce. American Commonwealth.

Burnaby. A Ride to Khiva.

Carlyle. French Revolution.

Cook. Voyages round the World.

Darwin. Naturalist's Voyage.

Dufferin. Letters from high Latitudes.

Duruy. History of France.

Escott. England: its People, etc.

Freeman. Sketch of European History.

Froissart. Chronicles.

Froude. Oceana.

Gardiner. Outline of English History.

Gibbon. Roman Empire.

Green. Short History of English People.

Kinglake. Eothen.

Loftie. History of London.

Macaulay. History of England.

McCarthy. History of our own Times.

Motley. Dutch Republic.

Oman. History of Greece.

Ramsay. Reminiscences of Scottish Life.

Scott. Tales of a Grandfather.

Stevenson. Edinburgh.

—— Inland Voyage.

—— Travels with a Donkey.

Taine. Notes on England.

Twain. Tramp Abroad.

Wallace. Russia.

Whiteing. Life of Paris.

Whymper. Scrambles amongst the Alps.


Biography.


Berlioz. Life by himself.

Boswell. Life of Johnson.

Cellini, Benvenuto. Autobiography.

Evelyn. Diary.

Forster. Life of Dickens.

Froude. Carlyle.

Hazlitt. Spirit of the Age.

Johnson. Lives of English Poets.

Lee. Life of Shakespeare.

Lewes. Life of Goethe.

Lockhart. Life of Scott.

—— Life of Napoleon.

—— Life of Burns.

Miller. My Schools and Schoolmasters.

Pepys. Diary and Memoirs.

Plutarch. Lives.

Rousseau. Confessions.

Ruskin. Prœterita.

Seeley. Napoleon I.

Southey. Life of Nelson.


Poetry, Essays, Etc.


Poetical Works of:— R. Browning, Burns, Byron, Chaucer, Coleridge, Dante, Goethe, Homer, Keats, Longfellow, Milton, Moore, Scott, Shakespeare, Shelley, Tennyson, Virgil, Wordsworth.


Henley. English Lyrics, 1340-1809.

Palgrave. Golden Treasury of Verse.

Mackay. 1,001 Gems of Poetry.

Addison. Selections from the 'Spectator'.

Bacon. Essays.

Birrell. Obiter Dicta.

Brown. Horæ Subsecivæ.

Browne (Artemus Ward). Works.

Burton. The Book Hunter.

Carlyle. Essays.

Chambers' Cyclopædia of English Literature. New ed.

De Quincey. Englsh Opium-eater.

Dunlop. History of Fiction (Wilson).

Emerson. Essays.

Hewitt-Beach. Our Mother Tongue.

Holmes. Breakfast-Table Series.

Jerome. Idle Thoughts.

Lamb. Essays of Elia.

Lang. Letters to Dead Authors.

—— Old Friends.

Lounsbury. History of English Language.

Montaigne. Essays.

Pater. Appreciations.

Saint-Beuve. Essays.

Stevenson. Across the Plains.

—— Virginibus puerisque.


Prose Fiction.


Austen. Pride and Prejudice.

Balzac. The Chouans.

—— Père Goriot.

—— The Magic Skin.

Barrie. Auld Licht Idylls.

—— A Window in Thrums.

—— The Little Minister.

Besant-Rice. The Golden Butterfly.

—— Ready-money Morti-boy.

Black. A Daughter of Heth

—— A Princess of Thule.

—— Shandon Bells.

Blackmore. Lorna Doone.

—— Springhaven.

Björnson. Arne.

—— Synnöve Solbakken.

Borrow. Lavengro.

—— Romany Rye.

Brontë (C.). Jane Eyre.

—— Shirley.

—— Villette.

—— (E.) Wuthering Heights

Bulwer. The Caxtons.

—— Last Days of Pompeii.

Carleton. Traits and Stories.

Cervantes. Don Quixote.

Collins. Moonstone.

——Woman in White.

Cooper. Leatherstocking Tales, 5 vols.

—— The Pilot.

Crawford. Saracinesca.

—— Sant' Ilario.

—— Casa Braccio.

Crockett. The Raiders.

Daudet. Fromont the Younger.

—— Tartarin of Tarascon.

Dickens. All his novels, or Bleak House, David Copperfield, Dombey and Son, Chuzzlewit, Nicholas Nickleby, Old Curiosity Shop, and Pickwick Papers.

Dostoyevsky. Crime and Punishment.

Doyle. Adventures of Sherlock Holmes.

—— The White Company.

Dumas. Monte Christo.

—— Three Musketeers Series.

Eliot. Adam Bede.

—— Mill on the Floss.

—— Romola.

—— Silas Marner.

Erckmann-Chatrian. The Conscript.

Feuillet. Romance of a Poor Young Man.

Fielding. Tom Jones.

Gaboriau. Monsieur Lecoq.

Galt. Annals of the Parish.

Gaskell. Cranford.

—— North and South.

Goethe. Wilhelm Meister.

Gogol. Tarass Boulba.

Goldsmith. Vicar of Wakefield.

Grant. Romance of War.

Haggard. She.

Hardy. Far from the Madding Crowd.

—— Tess of the D'Urbervilles.

Hawthorne. House of the Seven Gables.

—— Scarlet Letter.

Howells. Silas Lapham.

Hugo. Les Miserables.

—— Notre Dame.

Irving. Sketch Book.

Jacobs. Many Cargoes, etc.

James. Daisy Miller.

Jerome. Three Men in a Boat.

Jokai. Black Diamonds.

Kingsley. Hypatia.

—— Westward Ho!

Kipling. Jungle Books.

—— Plain Tales from the Hills.

La Fayette. The Princess of Cleves.

Le Sage. Gil Blas.

Lever. Harry Lorrequer.

Lover. Handy Andy.

MacDonald. Alec Forbes.

Malory. Morte d'Arthur.

Manzoni. The Betrothed.

Marryat. Midshipman Easy.

—— Peter Simple.

Meredith. Evan Harrington.

—— Shaving of Shagpat.

Morier. Hajji Baba.

Mulock. John Halifax.

Murray. Aunt Rachel.

Ohnet. The Ironmaster.

Oliphant. Margaret Maitland.

Poe. Grotesque Tales.

—— Arthur Gordon Pym.

—— The Gold Bug.

Reade. Cloister and the Hearth.

—— Foul Play.

—— Hard Cash.

—— It is Never too Late to Mend.

Richardson. Clarissa Harlowe.

Richter. Flower, Fruit, and Thorn pieces.

Russell. The Wreck of the 'Grosvenor'.

Sand. Consuelo.

—— Francis the Waif.

—— Mauprat.

Scott (M.). Tom Cringle's Log.

—— (Walter). All the Waverley Novels.

Shorthouse. John Inglesant.

Sidney. Arcadia.

Smollett. Humphry Clinker.

Sterne. Tristram Shandy.

Stevenson. Kidnapped.

—— Catriona.

—— Master of Ballantrae.

—— New Arabian Nights.

—— Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.

Sue. Wandering Jew.

Thackeray. Henry Esmond.

—— Newcomes.

—— Pendennis.

—— Vanity Fair.

Tolstoi. Anna Karenina.

—— War and Peace.

Trollope. Barchester Series

Turgenev. Spring Floods.

Ward. Robert Elsmere.

Weyman. Gentleman of France.

—— Under the Red Robe.

Wilson. Noctes Ambrosianæ.

Zola. The Downfall.


It is perhaps desirable, before quitting the subject of Household Libraries, to devote a little attention to a department which is generally overlooked, either because it is not considered sufficiently important, or from motives of mistaken delicacy. Sir Walter Scott, with the plain, honest frankness which characterized him, describes what arrangements he made at Abbotsford to make this part of his house attractive, by papering it with amusing caricatures; but very few others, save occasionally architects or builders, ever give the apartment in question a thought. This is rather regrettable, as it makes explanation somewhat difficult to any pioneer who desires to grapple with the subject, but it is as well to be frank and deal plainly with the matter. Well, then, the Bibliotheca Latrina, as this department of the Household Library may be called, has a considerable claim to attention, and its furnishing with books should be undertaken along with the rest of the house. Considering the peculiar characteristics of the apartment in question, and the large amount of desultory reading which takes place in it, the books procured must necessarily be of a slight and unsustained kind. A capital class of book, eminently suitable for the purpose, will be found in small collections of anecdotes like Joe Miller, Chambers, Seton, Laird of Logan, and dozens of others which need not be named. Books of aphorisms, like MacNish or Smith's Tin Trumpet; short moral reflections, like those of La Rochefoucauld; or amusing works, like Beresford's Miseries of Human Life, (an admirable book which ought to be reprinted at once); and all short and pithy collections, such as proverbs, epigrams, etc., might with perfect propriety find a place in the Bibliotheca Latrina. In this, as in other departments of the Household Library, ultimate selection of books must be left to the individual tastes and preferences of householders; but the object of this paragraph will be gained if it succeeds in preventing the claims of the Bibliotheca Latrina from being entirely overlooked.


CHAPTER IV

PROFESSIONAL AND WORKSHOP LIBRARIES

In a previous part of this work, allusion has been made to the indifference generally shown towards technical and professional literature by those for whose benefit it is laboriously compiled. Nearly every author and publisher of technological works has the same tale to relate, touching the indifference of workmen and masters alike to book-aids to their trade. Lawyers and medical men are certainly more discerning and liberal patrons of their professional literature, while clergymen must either buy books or cease to preach, but the average man of business, whatever his particular line may be, must be written down, along with the publican and the coster, as among those to whom the printed records of learning, wisdom, and scientific dexterity make but little appeal. Those superior persons—the average business men—who are continually parading their great commercial acumen before the humbler folks who only rank as customers, seem to be singularly short-sighted in regard to the aid which literature can, and does, lend to business. They support but one form of literature, if it can be dignified with the name, Advertising, and in this respect they are to be commended as faithful patrons of the art of printing. But in nearly every other respect they disdain to borrow hints from books or even their custodians. One instance will suffice, and it must be understood to refer exclusively to British men of business, and not to Americans and Germans, who have shown themselves intelligently alive to the power of literature and the excellence of the devices used in connexion with libraries. The average British man of business, then, is a conservative, who will not avail himself of even the most obvious labour-saving method, unless he is driven to test it, and reluctantly self-persuaded to use in spite of previous prejudice. The card-indexing system is a case in point. This method has been in everyday use in British, American, and Continental libraries for more than a century, and is recognized universally as a labour-saving device of the highest value. It has been widely adopted for every kind of business purpose in America and Germany—book-keeping, address-indexing, stock-keeping, traveller's records, and every variety of commercial operation-while in England, our men of business look at it askance, because they think it is quite a dilettante concern, used only by the impractical men of affairs who run libraries.It is not to be wondered at if such men are sceptical regarding the value of book-knowledge when they thus ignore an appliance, which, considered solely as a labour-saving device for business purposes, might easily become a means of materially increasing and improving the volume and quality of their commercial operations. If any one doubts the truth of the assertion above made, as to the general indifference towards technical literature of manufacturers, workmen, and merchants, he, or she, has only to take stock of the technical books contained in the nearest shop or warehouse, to be convinced that literature plays but a small part in British trade or commerce.

The workshop library, generally speaking, consists of various price-lists and manufacturers' catalogues, with, perhaps, a ready-reckoner and a few tables of rules and formulæ. Many workshops do not even possess the price-lists, and all kinds of processes are accomplished by rule-of-thumb, in the good old way sanctioned by the traditions of a long series of venerated great-great-grandfathers. Methods and recipes are used which are simply handed down from workman to workman, which have never been properly recorded for reference, and never, therefore, compared with similar, and perhaps more economical and effective processes. Some workshops of the largest kind do possess valuable and fully-equipped reference libraries of technical books, but they are very often locked up in the office for the sole benefit of the manager and foremen. In most factories, very little in the way of technical books will be found, save a few volumes of patterns or trade catalogues; and it must be confessed that, from libraries in hotels and shops to those in lighthouses and battleships, fully-stocked and up-to-date technical collections of books, capable of being used in aid of the special trades or professions are very seldom in evidence.

The question of providing useful and suitable books for shops, warehouses or factories is greatly complicated by the immense variety of different trades and occupations implied by the very names of shop and workshop, and further by the absence of a good modern guide to the literature of trades. The books which may prove useful to a grocer are not necessarily those which an ironmonger would require, while the reference books wanted in a foundry would differ materially from those applicable to a tannery. It is, therefore, a matter of impossibility to attempt to single out the technical books which are best adapted for this, or that, or the other trade. Those who are interested must rely upon works like Sonnenschein's Best Books and Readers' Guide, or Greenwood's Guide to Technical and Commercial Books to be found in all good libraries, and the reviews or notes in special trade journals. But every shopkeeper and manufacturer ought to possess at least two or three of the leading textbooks dealing with his trade, and at least one manual of accountancy. It is needless to repeat what has already been said about the in-difference of shopkeepers to their technical literature and journals. It is, unfortunately, a fact too well known to the publishers who bravely undertake the thankless task of giving tradesmen, in book form, an equivalent for the technical training which our own Government neglects, while other nations are pushing ahead and injuring the old British reputation for quality and accuracy in every kind of manufacture and machine. It is not ignorance, because the necessity for cultivating scientific methods has been dinned into John Bull's ears for very many years, and, generally speaking, he is more indifferent now than he was before 1870. Indeed, it may be questioned if there was not more genuine taste for hard study and sound education years ago, when the population was many millions less, than at the present time, when horse-racing, betting, billiards, football, and hooliganism in every form are the favourite amusements of a great majority of our commercial and artizan population. But this is not an essay on social progress. Of books which may be regarded as labour-saving tools in the business of every shopkeeper there are at least two which should be considered indispensable:—

A Local Directory.

A Ready Reckoner.


This may seem a very trite and obvious thing to say, but any one with a turn for inquiry may easily ascertain how very necessary these recommendations are, if he strolls into any retail shop in a strange locality, and asks to see the directory. One might as well ask for a sight of the Bible or a Nautical Almanac in a public house!

The list which follows is composed mostly of books which will be found useful in almost any kind of business, while some of them are more likely to be required in workshops:—

Book-keeping and Accountancy.


Hamilton-Ball. Book-keeping.

Crellin. Book-keeping for Wholesale and Retail Houses.

Thornton. Book-keeping for Business Men.

Jackson. Book-keeping.

Thomson. Principles and Practice of Book-keeping.

Arnold (H. L.). The Complete Cost-keeper. 1900.

Garcke and Fells. Factory Accounts. 1902.

Gunn. Business Training Manual.

Hooper-Graham. Modern Business Methods Series.

Cordingley. Counting-house Guide.

Ready. Précis and Précis Writing.


Receipts.


Spon. Workshop Receipts. 5 Series.

Cooley. Cyclopædia of Practical Receipts. 2 vols.

Brannt-Wahl. Techno-Chemical Receipt Book.

'Scientific American' Receipt Book.


Rules and Tables.


Clark. Mechanical Engineers' Pocket-book of Tables.

Trautwine. Civil Engineer's Pocket-book.

Molesworth. Pocket-book of Engineering Formula.

Hutton. Works Manager's Handbook of Rules.


Miscellaneous.


Statesman's Year-Book. Annually as issued.

A good Atlas.

Chisholm's Gazetteer.

Law without Lawyers.

Every Man's Own Lawyer.

The Secretary's Assistant and Correspondent's Guide.

A good English Dictionary, and, if necessary, German or French ones.


A considerable number of the books noted under the head of the reference department of the Household Library will also be found useful in Factories, Warehouses, and Shops.

As regards the books suitable for business houses which lodge their assistants on the premises, like the large drapery houses in London, the selections made under the title of 'Suggestions for a General Household Library will be found suitable. As a rule, the so-called 'libraries' in such business houses are a complete sham. Certain stoppages are made monthly from the wages of drapers' assistants who 'live in', which are supposed to go towards the 'library'; but, as this educational department usually consists of a few magazines and newspapers, its importance need not be unduly magnified. If the heads of such houses would provide plenty of good books, and discourage the type of semi-sporting newspaper usually found in the so-called 'libraries', there would be less reason to complain of the general conduct of the misguided young folks who are compelled to waste their lives 'living in'. At any rate, a good and well-selected library would tend to discourage betting, and the never-ending indulgence in 'sweepstakes' among both males and females, and might even prevent many of the girls from finding their chief recreation on the pavement.

A parental government is supposed to look after our soldiers and sailors, while municipal and other bodies are credited with exercising a similar care over policemen, firemen, street-cleaners, lighthouse keepers, coast-guard, etc. No doubt the municipal public libraries serve exceedingly well the needs of all kinds of municipal workers, and I know that the Brethren of Trinity House and the Commissioners for Northern Lights, look well after the literary entertainment of the watchers in our lonely lighthouses. Imagine the exquisite horror of being able to read Poe's Fall of the House of Usher, or Arthur Gordon Pym, in an isolated lighthouse during a dreadlful storm! It is doubtful, however, if the provision of libraries made by the Admiralty and the War Office for the inhabitants of our barracks and ships of war is at all adequate. The best technical collections are not freely at the call of the common soldier or sailor, and consequently their value must be greatly limited. It is not proposed to consider the needs of every variety of special library, because to a great extent the chapters on the small municipal library will answer every ordinary question.


CHAPTER V

THE SCHOOL LIBRARY

One of the most important varieties of the Small Library which has remained practically undeveloped in the United Kingdom, is the School Library, which is sometimes looked upon as a plaything, sometimes as an unnecessary adjunct to educational work. In the United States great progress has been made in the co-ordination of school and municipal library work, but even in that land of unlimited resources, the school library is not such an intimate and useful factor in the life of the average scholar as it might be made. But there is a vast difference in the methods and aims of the two countries in all that concerns school libraries. In the United Kingdom we have a series of isolated, and more or less successful, experiments, which are not recognized by any central educational authority, and not, it must be admitted, directed towards any specific or well-defined end. In America, the school library movement is in touch with both the State and Federal authorities, while in many cases, the sympathies of the Municipal authorities are enlisted as well. The library and educational authorities of America are in close touch with each other, and work hand in hand, but in Britain the same authorities are scarcely on speaking terms, save, as already said, in a few iolated instances. It will be enough if, in illustration of this, it is stated that although we have many good, bad and indifferent collegiate, public school, board school, church school, academic, and Sunday school libraries, they simply exist as concessions to a kind of convention, and not as useful and working units of a great national system of education and literary recreation. It is true that this ideal has not yet been attained in America—indeed, there is a good deal of expenditure of fruitless energy and waste of library resources there—but they have secured the interest of the Central Education Department, and they are gradually assembling, coordinating and applying their library resources in an economical and profitable manner.

It is not the purpose of this book to describe methods of organization or work which will be equally suitable for school libraries like those at Harrow, Eton or Charterhouse, and the small collections in elementary schools, but to give a few general hints which may be useful in strengthening and improving the smaller school libraries of the country. The ordinary elementary and Sunday school libraries are not selected on very broad or useful lines, nor are they worked on the best and simplest methods. The scholastic mind seems to have a reverence for the goody-goody in literature, which is either a tradition, or the outcome of a long struggle with unruly boys and girls. This has perhaps brought about the opinion that mild, sloppy, intellectual fare may prove effectual in curbing healthy animal spirits. It is hard to say what merit may lurk in this dietetic policy. It may safely be assumed, however, that diet will have no effect of an appreciable kind in subduing the strong, natural and boisterous spirits of the healthy young. There are plenty of instances on actual record of very brave Arab warriors reared on nothing but rice and dates; Irish heroes fed chiefly on potatoes; Scottish soldiers on oatmeal; English men of might on beef and beer; and Boer fighters on biltong and water; so that no accurate forecast can be made of the future behaviour of a youth or maiden fed on bread and milk or tea and toast. As it is with the alimentary, so it is with the intellectual diet. A course of Sandford and Merton plus A Candle Lighted by the Lord, and similar pieces of morbid religious reading, will not model our Tom Sawyers, Stalkys, and Tom Browns, into the uniform bundles of obedient deference, so greatly prized by many teachers. It might be less trouble for the schoolmasters, but it would be very bad for the boys and girls if their reading or training turned them into milksops or prudes.

Many guides to the formation of libraries for the young have been issued, and the best of these have been compiled by practical librarians, and not by teachers. Usually, the schoolmaster's list is full of vapid, colourless and goody-goody stuff which children will not read. They cannot be expected to take great delight in literature which is reminiscent of school lessons, or which is calculated to hurt their self-respect, by being what a London lad once contemptuously called them—'Kids' Books'. The Kids' Books' issued by the various religio-commercial agencies, with their extremely proper estimates of good and evil, and their awful slaughter of good and innocent little heroes and heroines, who are made to die young from malignant diseases, as a reward for virtue, is just the very class of literature which every healthy-minded boy or girl will repudiate. Yet, this is the kind of books with which most of our Sunday and elementary schools are supplied, if any kind of library exists at all. Now, instead of this utterly feeble stuff, which is more likely to induce boredom than inculcate moral principle, why not start with a small reference library, which will simplify studies, and aid scholars in their pursuit of knowledge? Both teachers and students would benefit by the presence of a small, up-to-date reference collection in some accessible part of the school, and the books noted at the end of this chapter will probably meet the needs of most elementary schools. The same books, or others of a similar kind, should find a place in the reference collections which ought to be found in every Municipal Juvenile Library. One of the most effectual hindrances to the selection of suitable books for school libraries is the want of sufficient funds. It is the same disability which hampers the work of municipal libraries, and indeed everybody, save a few American and Hebrew millionaires. Unless an adequate grant is made for the purchase of new, and the renewal of worn-out books, no school library can possibly be equipped with good books, or maintained in a fair condition of efficiency. Most of the school libraries are divisible into two categories—the Used and the Unused. The former are freely accessible to all the scholars, and the books are generally worn to rags, because there is no fund from which to replace them. The latter are kept in locked presses, under the care of a schoolmaster, and the books are only occasionally doled out to the boys who give least trouble, as a reward for the successful repression of their natural animal spirits. The contents of both kinds of library are not distinguished by much taste or catholicity in selection, and many of the books are faded 'chestnuts' which no self-respecting scholar will waste time over if he or she can get anything with more life in it. The school libraries in question generally contain some volumes of Peter Parley's Annual; a few ragged Ballantynes, Kingstons, and Vernes; the Quiver; a ragged assortment of Chatterbox; a missionary record or two; Pinnock's Catechisms; Corner's History of England; and similar accurate and stimulating works, many of which are undoubtedly the gifts of pious donors who wished to make room in their own collections for something fresh. On a rather higher plane, but still suffering somewhat from the withering influences of redtape uniformity and goody-goodyism, are the lists of books for school libraries and prizes prepared by the Education Committee of the London County Council. Here the selection is much more catholic and extensive, but here also the Henty-Ballantyne-A.L.O.E. influence is strongly marked.

It will be sufficient to make reference to the following work for a good deal of useful information concerning Sunday school libraries—institutions, by the way, which are no longer so much cultivated as in former days: Sunday School and Village Libraries, with a List of Suitable Books and Hints on Management, by Thomas Greenwood. London: Jas. Clarke & Co. 1902. This little work is the best textbook on the subject hitherto published, and its author is the chief authority on municipal libraries in Britain. It only requires revision in the book-selection department to bring it well up to date, and this can be done by comparing it with the lists published in more recent guides. The general administration and care of School Libraries differ but little from the method described for small municipal libraries, and there is no reason, therefore, for traversing ground already fully covered. Instead, this chapter will be fitly concluded with lists of the authors and books suggested as suitable and useful for Juvenile Reference and Lending Libraries, whether attached to schools or municipal libraries.


REFERENCE BOOKS FOR JUVENILE LIBRARIES.


A—Generalia.


Cassell's Cabinet Cyclopædia.

Cassell's New Popular Educator.

Chambers' Encyclopædia 10 vols.

Harmsworth's Cyclopædia. 8 vols.

Library of Useful Stories. A set.

Temple Cyclopædic Primers. A set.

Baker. Boy's Book of Inventions. 2 vols.

Williams. Romance of Modern Invention.

Brooksmith. Arithmetic in Theory and Practice.

Sonnenschein's Arithmetic.

Workman's Arithmetic.

Chrystal. Algebra.

Todhunter. Algebra.

Woolhouse. Measures, Weights and Moneys of all Nations.

Heaton's Enlarged Ready Reckoner.

Jones. Book-keeping for Schools.

Thornton. Manual of Book-keeping.

Todhunter. Euclid.

Workman and Cracknell. Theoretical and Practical Geometry.

Todhunter. Trigonometry for Beginners

Todhunter. Mensuration for Beginners.


B–D—Physical Science.


Deschanel. Physics.

Williams. Romance of Modern Engineering.

Hunt. Concise History of Music.

Niecks. Musical Terms.

Réclus. The Earth.

Pouchet. The Universe.

Pepper. Boy's Book of Science.


E–F—Biological Science.


Cassell's Natural History, by A. E. Bonser.

Wood. Popular Natural History.

Step. The Romance of Wild Flowers.

—— Wayside and Woodland Blossoms.

—— Wayside and Woodland Trees.

Hulme. Familiar Garden Flowers.

Furneaux. Outdoor World: Young Collector's Handbook.

Gordon. Birds and Nests.

Young Collector Series. A set.

Hutchinson. Living Animals of the World.


G–H—Ethnology and Sports.


Hutchinson. Living Races of Mankind.

Bettany World's Inhabitants.

Brown. Races of Mankind.

Maclaren. Physical Education.

Athletic Records.

Badminton Library. Athletics, by Shearman and others.

Cassell's Book of Outdoor Sports and Indoor Amusements.

Gomme. English Singing Games.

Hutchinson's Games, Indoor and Outdoor.

Books on Cricket, Hockey, Football, Croquet, Lawn Tennis, and Swimming.


I—Economic Biology.


Cassell's Dictionary of Practical Gardening, ed. by Wright.

Rosevear. Textbook of Needlework,

Planché. History of British Costume.

Cassell's Great Industries.

—— New Dictionary of Cookery.

Beeton's Household Management.


J–K—Religion.


Bettany. The World's Religions.

Bible in English (Oxford ed. with Helps and Illustrations).

Easton. Illustrated Dictionary of the Bible.


L—Social Science.


Chambers' Book of Days.

Dyer. British Popular Customs.

Humphrey. Coin Collector's Manual.


M—Language and Literature.


Ogilvie. Student's English Dictionary.

James and Mole. French Dictionary.

Whitney. German Dictionary.

Smith and Hall. Latin Dictionary.

Liddell and Scott. A Greek-English Lexicon.

Bardsley. English and Welsh Surnames.

Swan. Christian Names, Male and Female.

Miles. New Standard Elocutionist.

Bell. Standard Elocutionist.

Chambers' Cyclopædia of English Literature. 3 vols.

Pitman's Shorthand Dictionary.


N—Literary Forms.


Nield. Guide to the best Historical Novels and Tales.

Grainger. Index to Poetry.

Collection of Ballads of England and Scotland.

Collections of Songs and other Anthologies.

Palgrave. Children's Treasury of Lyrical Poetry.

Henley, ed. Lyra heroica.

Collections of Anecdotes, Proverbs, Mottoes, and Books of Quotations.

Brewer Dictionary of Quotations.

Bartlett. Familiar Quotations.

1,001 Anecdotes by Miles.

1,001 Animal Anecdotes by Miles.

Christy. Proverbs and Maxims of all Ages.


O-W—History and Geography.


Ollier. Universal History.

Duruy. History of the World.

Low and Pulling. Dictionary of English History.

Blair. Chronological Tables.

Haydn. Dictionary of Dates.

Chisholm. Gazetteer of the World.

Mill. International Geography.

Johnston's Royal Atlas (small edition).

Histories of England, France, Germany, Spain, Austria, Portugal, Italy, Russia, Netherlands, Scandinavia, Switzerland, Greece, Turkey, Rome, India, China, Japan, United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, British Colonies.


X—Biography.


Chambers' Biographical Dictionary.

Dictionary of National Biography (Index).

Books of Flags and Crests.

Who's Who.

Hulme (F. E.). Flags of the World.


LENDING BOOKS FOR JUVENILE LIBRARIES.


FICTION.


'A.L.O.E.' See Tucker.

Adams (H. C.). Set.

Alcott (Louisa M.). Set.

Andersen (Hans C.). Fairy Tales.

—— Contes. [French text.]

—— Marchen. [German text].

Andrews (Jane). Set.

Animal Autobiographies (Series).

Arabian Nights Entertainments.

Asbjörnsen (P. C.). Set. [Fairy Tales].

Atkinson (J. C.). Set.

Aulnoy (Countess d'). Fairy Tales

Austin (Stella) Set.

Bain (R. Nisbet) ed. Cossack Fairy Tales.

—— trans. Russian Fairy Tales.

—— Turkish Fairy Tales.

Baker (Sir Samuel W.). Cast up by the Sea.

—— True Tales for my Grandsons.

Baldwin. Story of Roland.

—— Story of Siegfried and Beowulf.

Ballantyne (R. M.). Set.

Bellerby (Isabel) and others. Diamond Fairy Book.

Bell's Reading Books. (Abridgments of the works of Dickens, Goldsmith, Scott.)

Bennett (John). Master Skylark.

Booth (Maud B.). Lights of Childland.

—— Sleepy-time Stories.

Bowman (Anne). Set.

Brabourne (Lord) See Knatchbull-Hugessen.

'Brenda.' See Smith (Mrs. Castle).

Brentano (C.) Fairy Tales and New Fairy Tales.

Brereton (F. S.). Set.

Bullen (Frank T.). Frank Brown, Sea Apprentice.

—— A Son of the Sea.

Bunyan (John). Pilgrim's Progress. (Also told to the children by Mary Macgregor.)

Burnett (Frances H.). Set.

Caine (O. V.). Set.

Campe (Joachim H.). Robinson der Jüngere. [German text.]

Capuana (Luigi). Once upon a time: fairy tales.

Carové (F. W.). The Story without an End.

'Carroll (Lewis).' See Dodgson.

Cazin (Mme. J.). Set. [French text.]

Cervantes-Saavedra (M. de). Don Quixote: Adapted for Children, by Jones, Lang, Parry.

Chaucer. Canterbury Tales [in prose, by C. Cowden Clarke, Darton and others].

Church (Alfred J.). Set.

'Collingwood (Harry).' See Lancaster.

'Coolridge (Susan).' See Woolsey (Sarah C.).

Cooper (Edward H.). Wyemarke Series.

Cooper (James F.). Leather-stocking tales (series)

Cox (Sir G. W.). Tales of Ancient Greece.

Crake (A. D.). Set.

Creswick (Paul). Set.

Crocket (S. R.) Red Cap Tales.

—— Sir Toady Crusoe.

—— Surprising Adventures of Sir Toady Lion.

—— Sweetheart Travellers.

Cummins (Maria S.). The Lamplighter.

Day (Thomas). Sandford and Merton.


Defoe (Daniel). Robinson Crusoe (also told to the children by J. Lang).

—— Robinson Crusoe's Reisen. [German text.]

—— La et les aventures de R. C. [French text.]

De la Ramée (L.) 'Ouida'. Bimbi: stories for children.

Dickens (Charles) The Adventures of Oliver Twist: abridged. (Bell's Reading Books.)

—— Story of little Nell: abridged. (Bell's Reading Books.)

—— Story of Paul Dombey: abridged. (Bell's Reading Books.)

Dodge (Mrs. M. E.) Donand Dorothy.

—— Hans Brinker.

Dodgson (C. L.) 'Lewis Carroll'. Set.

Edgar (J. G.). Set.

Edgeworth (Maria). Set.

Edwards (Charles). Set.

Ellis (Edward S.). Set.

Everett-Green (Evelyn). Set.

Ewing (Juliana H.). Set.

Farrar (Frederic W.). Set.

Farrow (G. E.). Set.

Fenn (George Manville). Set.

Field (Mrs. E. M.). Set.

Finnemore (John). Set.

Fortescue (John). Story of a Reed Deer.

Fowler (W. W.). Set.

Gilliat (E.). Set.

Goldsmith (Oliver). See Bell's Reading Books.

Gomme (G. L.). ed. Set.

Gordon Stables (W.) Set.

Green (E. Everett.). See Everett-Green.

Grierson (Elizabeth W.). Children's Tales from Scottish Ballads.

Grimm (W. and J.). Fairy Tales.

—— Contes choisis des fères Grimm. [French text.]

—— Kinder und Hausmarchen. [German text].

Groves (J. Percy). Set.

Harraden (Beatrice). New Book of the Fairies.

—— Things will take a turn.

—— Untold Tales of the Past.

Harris (Joel C,), Set.

Hawthorne (Nathaniel). 1. A Wonder Book for Boys and Girls.

—————— 2. Tanglewood Tales. Sequel.

Henty (George A.). Set.

Home (Andrew). Set. (School stories.)

Hughes (Thomas). Tom Brown's Schooldays.

Jacobs (Joseph) ed. Set. (Fairy tales.)

Jefferies (Richard). Bevis.

—— Wood Magic.

Kearton (Richard). Adventures of Cock Robin and his Mate.

—— Strange Adventures in Dicky-bird Land.

Keary (A. E.) Heroes of Asgard.

Ker (David). Set.

King. Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table.

Kingsley (Charles). The Heroes (also told to the children by Mary Macgregor).

——The Water Babies (also told to the children by Amy Steedman).

Kingston (Wm. H. G.). Set.

Kipling (Rudyard). Captains Courageous.

——1. Jungle Book.

——2. Second Jungle Book.

——Just so Stories.

——Puck of Pook's Hill.

——Stalky & Co.

Knatchbull-Hugessen (E. H.), Lord Brabourne. Set.

Lamb (C. and M.). Mrs. Leicester's School.

——Tales from Shakespeare.

Lancaster (Wm. J. C.), ’Harry Collingwood’, pseud. Set.

Lang (Andrew) ed. Set. of fairy books

Lanier (S.). Set.

Leighton (Robert). Set.

Macdonald (George). At the Back of the North Wind.

——Gutta-percha Willie.

——Light Princess.

——1. Princess and the Goblin.

——2. Princess and the Curdie.

——Ranald Bannerman's Boyhood.

——Rough Shaking.

Macgregor (Mary). Set. (Stories of King Arthur, also adaptations of the Pilgrim's Progress and The Heroes.)

Macleod (Mary). Set.

Malory (Sir T.). (Adaptations of the Story of King Arthur by Clay, Cutler, Frost, Greene, Macgregor, Macleod, Pyle and others.)

Marryat (Frederick). Children of the New Forest.

——The Litile Savage.

——Masterman Ready.

——The Mission.

——Settlers in Canada.

Marshall (Emma.) Set.

Meade (L. T.). Set.

Miles (Alfred H.) ed. Fifty-two Stories Series.

Molesworth (Mrs. Mary L.). Set.

Moore (F. Frankfort). Set. (Sea stories).

Nesbit (Edith). Set.

’Ouida.' See De La Ramée

Parry (Edward A.). Set.

Perry (W. C.). Boy's Iliad.

——Boy's Odyssey.

Pickering (Edgar). Set.

Pierson (Clara D.). Set.

Price (Eleanor C.). In the Lion's Mouth.

Ragozin (Z. A.). Frithjof.

——Siegfried.

Reed (Taibot Baines). Set.

Reid (Mayne). Afloat in the Forest.

——The Boy Slaves.

——The Boy Tar.

——1. The Bush Boys.

——2. The Young Yägers.

——3. The Giraffe Hunters

——Bruin.

——1. The Plant Hunters.

——2. The Cliff Climbers

——1. Ran away to Sea.

——2. The Ocean Waifs.

——The Vee-Boers.

Robin Hood, Stories of. (Adapted for Children by Creswick, M'Spadden, Marsh, Pyle and others.

Russell (W. Clark). Master Rockafellar's Voyage.

Saunders (Mrs. Marshall). Set.

Scott (Michael). Cruise of the ’Midge'.

——Tom Cringle's Log.

Scott (Sir Walter). See Bell's Reading Books, also abridged editions of Ivanhoe, A Legend of Montrose, The Talisman, with notes and a short biography by A. Lang.

Scudder (H. E.). Children's Book.

Sewell (Anna). Black Beauty.

Shakespeare. Prose adaptations by Lamb, Lang, Lanier, Quiller-Couch, Townsend and others.

Sharp (Evelyn). Set.

Smith (Mrs. Castle), ’Brenda'. Set.

Smith (Hannah), 'Hesba Stretton '. Set.

Spenser. Prose adaptations by Macleod, Royde-Smith, Towry.

Stables (Wm. Gordon-). See Gordon-Stables.

Stanley (Sir Henry M.). My Dark Companions.

——My Kalulu.

Stevenson (Robert Louis). Treasure Island.

——The Black Arrow.

Stowe (Mrs. H. Beecher). Uncle Tom's Cabin: told to the children by H. E. Marshall.

——See also Bell's Reading Books.

Strang (Herbert). Set.

'Stretton (Hesba)'. See Smith (Hannah).

Swift (Jonathan). Gulliver's Travels: told to the children by John Lang.

——Voyages de G. [French text: abridged for children.]

Tabor (Eliza). Set. (Pub. all anon., When I was a little Girl, Eight Years Old and others.)

Tucker (Mrs. C. M.), ’A.L.O.E’ Set.

Turner (Ethel). Set.

Verne (Jules). Set.

Walton (Mrs. O. F.). Set.

Warner (Susan), ’Elizabeth Wetherall'. Wide, Wide World.

Whistler (Charles W.). Set.

Wiggin (Kate D.). Set. (Children's stories).

Woolsey (Sarah C.), ’Susan Coolridge'. What Katy Did Series.

Wyss (Johann R.). Swiss Family Robinson.

——Le Robinson Suisse. {French text.]

——Willis the Pilot.


NON-FICTION.

Popular Science and Art.


Allen (P). Playing at Botany.

Andrews (Mrs. J.). Stories Mother Nature told her Children.

Badenoch (L. N.). Romance of the Insect World.

Baker (R. S.). Boy's Book of Inventions.

—— Boy's Second Book of Inventions.

Ball (Sir R. S.). Star-land.

Beard (L. and A. B.). Girl's Handy Book.

—— Boy's Handy Book.

Bonser (A. E.). Cassell's Natural History for Young People.

Buckley (A. B.). Fairy-land of Science.

—— Through Magic Glasses.

—— Short History of Natural Science.

—— Life and her Children.

Cassell's Book of Sports and Pastimes.

Cochrane (R.). Four Hundred Animal Stories.

—— More Animal Stories.

—— Romance of Industry and Invention.

Clodd (E.). Childhood of the World.

Darwin (Charles). Voyage round the World in the ship 'Beagle'.

Faraday (M.). Chemical History of a Candle.

Fowler (W. W.). Tales of the Birds.

Furneaux (W.). The Outdoor World, or Young Collector's Handbook

Giberne (A.). The Mighty Deep.

—— Sun, Moon, and Stars.

—— Radiant Stars.

Gomme (A.). English Singing Games.

Henslow. Botany for Children.

Hutchison. Indoor Games.

—— Outdoor Games.

Kearton (R.). Our Bird Friends: for Boys and Girls.

—— Nature's Carol Singers.

Kingsley (C.). Madam How and Lady Why.

Lukin (J.). Young Mechanic.

Lucas (E. V. and E.). What shall we do now? Children's Games and Employments.

Menpes. The World's Children.

Pepper (J. H.). Boy's Playbook of Science.

—— Boy's Book of Metals.

Seton-Thompson. Lives of the Hunted.

—— Wild Animals I have Known

St. John. Things a Boy should know about Electricity.

Stickney (J. H.). Bird World for Children.

Taylor (J. E.) Geological Stories.

White (Gilbert). Natural History of Selborne.

Williams (A.). Romance of Modern Engineering.

—— How it works.

Wood (J. G.). The Boy's Own Book of Natural History.

—— Popular Natural History.

Young Collector's Handbooks.


Biography.


Bolton (S. K.). Lives of Girls who became Famous.

—— Lives of Boys who became Famous.

Brooks (E. S.). Historic Boys.

Edgar. Boyhood of Great Men.

Chambers (W. and R.). Life by R. Chambers.

Columbus, Story of. by Seeley.

Cook (Capt. J.), by Sir W. Besant.

Darling, Grace, Life, by Eva Hope.

Drake, by G. M. Towle.

Edward (Thomas). Life of a Scotch Naturalist, by Smiles.

Fleming (Marjorie) (Pet Marjorie), Life, by Macbean.

Joan of Arc, by Boutet de Monvel.

Lincoln (Abraham) by Thayer.

Livingstone (David), by H. J. Adams.

Mackay of Uganda. Story of his life told for boys by his sister.

Nasmyth (James), ed. by Smiles.

Nelson (Horatio), Life, by Hadden.

Paton (John), Story of, told for young folks.

Plutarch, Boy's and Girl's, by White.

Washington (Geo.), by Thayer.

Wellington, Life, by W. H. Maxwell.

Victoria, Queen, Story of the Life, by Tulloch.


History and Travel.


Ballantyne. Hudson's Bay.

Brassey (Lady). Voyage in the 'Sunbeam'.

Church (A. J.). Pictures from Greek Life and Story.

—— Pictures from Roman Life and Story.

Cook (Capt.). Three Voyages round the World.

Creasy (Sir E.). The Fifteen Decisive Battles of the World.

Cumming. Five Years of a Hunter's Life in South Africa.

Dickens (C.). A Child's History of England.

Fitchett (W. H.). Deeds that won the Empire.

Johnes (M.) Boy's Book of Modern Travel and Adventure.

Josephus. Our Young Folks' Josephus.

Joyce (P. W.). Child's History of Ireland.

Kane (E. H.). Arctic Explorations.

Knox (T. W.). Set of Travel Books.

Lanier (Sidney). Boy's Froissart.

Macleod (N.). Half-hours in the Holy Land.

Marshall (H. E.). Our Island Story.

Marshal (E.). Scotland's Story a child's history.

Mitton (G. E.). London.

Park (Mungo). Travels in Africa.

Religious Tract Soc. Pictures of Travel, a set.

Scott (Sir W.). Tales of a Grandfather (Scotland).

—— Tales of a Grandfather (France).

Smiles (S.). Boy's Voyage round the World.

Synge (M. B.). Story of the World for Children of the British Empire.

Yonge (C. M.) Aunt Charlotte's Stories of English History.


Poetry.


Caldecott. Collection of Pictures and Songs.

Chadburn (M.). Mother Goose's Nursery Rhymes.

Coates. Children's Book of Poetry.

Field (E.). Lullaby-land: songs of childhood.

Halliwell-Phillips. Nursey Rhymes.

Henley (W. E.). Lyra heroica: verse for boys.

Lang (Andrew). Nursery Rhyme Book.

Lucas (E. V.). Book of Poetry for Children.

Palgrave (F. T.) Children's Treasury of Lyrical Poetry. 2 vols.

Stevenson (R. L.). Child's Garden of Verses.

Tennyson for the Young: ed. by Ainger.


CHAPTER VI

THE SMALL MUNICIPAL LIBRARY

With certain honourable exceptions, the smaller municipal libraries of the United Kingdom may be said to become formed by a process which involves the accumulation of books to the exclusion of literature. In other words, the matter-of-fact business men who usually control such institutions, prefer in most cases to have quantity rather than quality, and desire to see a number of books, no matter how useless, rather than a well-selected library of representative literature. The reasons for this are quite obvious. A library being but a collection of books, it becomes business men to assemble as many as possible in the shortest time, in order, perhaps, to outshine an adjoining township, or to satisfy the ratepayers that they are hard at work in the interests of education! To many library committeemen a book is just a book, and like bricks, or paving stones, or potatoes, or other realizable stock, the bigger the accumulation the better. When the typical library committeeman is told that his library contains 5,000 volumes, he never asks how the different classes of literature are represented, but what is the average cost per volume? It is inevitable that it should be so, because the great majority of public library administrators are drawn from the ranks of the small tradesmen, persons interested in poor-law administration, and others to whom the question of an additional halfpenny on the local rates is of more importance than their chance of a niche in Paradise. They do not know, and cannot appreciate, the difference between a great classic in science and an elementary popular primer on the same subject. A school atlas at 3s. 6d. is more to be desired by such authorities than a 6 or 10 guinea atlas by a great firm of cartographers, because it is cheap, and keeps down the average per volume stocked, to the business-like limit of 1s. 6d. Their motto is—'Better twenty "remainder" novels at 1s. 3d. each, than one standard history or textbook of science'. No doubt a great deal of this disregard of the proper function of the public library and the importance of careful book-selection, arises from lack of competent advice. It is difficult in small places for the local authority to attract a duly qualified librarian, and they are forced, in consequence, to rely upon the instinct and assurance of a committee. In hundreds of cases their confidence is not misplaced, because there are men to be found on local boards who will cheerfully undertake any kind of duty, however special or technical, from the planning of water-works and sewage-farms to the organization of electric light stations and public libraries. Nothing comes amiss to these cocksure local notables, and it is only fair to say that, in most cases of abject failure, it is the interference of zealous ignorance which is the prime cause. Remembering, however, that insufficient means is the chief reason why small municipal libraries are unable to obtain the services of trained officers, it may be profitable to consider how this defect can be remedied. Two solutions present themselves, and both are equally sane and practical. A public library committee about to commence operations, but unable to pay for a skilled librarian, should communicate with the Library Association, stating their case, and asking that body to nominate a trained librarian who, for an agreed fee, would act as adviser to the library authority, and enable the work of organization to be accomplished on modern scientific lines. In every case such a course would save committees from all kinds of mistakes, and in the end secure efficiency with economy. Failing this highly common-sense method, the committee might apply to the nearest large town library and obtain the advice of the chief officer, with or without fee, as may be arranged, or, perhaps, secure the occasional services of a trained member of the staff for a small fee. Any of these courses is preferable to the unrestricted or frequently mistaken work of raw committees, and the suggestion is humbly offered that to adopt one of them is even wider and more economical than a blind dependence on the precepts of this little guide.

In any case, it is perfectly safe to assume that, in the all-important work of book-selection, communities would be duly warned against the folly of buying the top-shelf books of the local bookseller, or adding the rubbish which is donated by generously-minded individuals eager to effect a clearance of their own shelves by posing as public benefactors. A considerable number of municipal libraries have been formed in this way, and cases are on record of committees going a-bookbuying, and finding it quite an agreeable method of bestowing patronage on worthy local tradesmen. In one town, which shall be nameless, the library committee drove round in a wagonette to the various second-hand booksellers and bought books wholesale, by the square yard, as it were. Having viewed a few tiers of books in a general kind of way, the question would be put, 'How much for this lot?' and if the price seemed to fall within the collective idea of moderation, and was thought to be not too great a strain on the 'average', then the lot was promptly ordered. In this haphazard way quite a large number of libraries are formed, and so a locality is let in for dozens of duplicates, faded sermons, unsuitable editions of all kinds, school books, unbound magazines, and a wealth of trash too miscellaneous for polite mention. There is no exaggeration about this, as a cursory examination of some of the older catalogues will prove, and it is mentioned here as a strong reason why new committees should seek expert guidance in book-selection and other technical matters, before embarking on a course which is certain to lead to the accumulation of lumber. It is easy to obtain competent advice from a body like the Library Association, which has its headquarters in London, and in this way avoid the perpetration of serious mistakes. In the headlong rush to accumulate books, it is often overlooked that the public library movement is intended to enable ordinary citizens, not overburdened with wealth, to obtain by means of general co-operation all kinds of expensive books and aids to the business of life, which otherwise could never be seen or consulted. It is not the duty of a public library committee to buy cheap textbooks at a shilling or sixpence each, which any one interested can purchase for himself, but rather to provide means of advanced study and rational recreation which would not be possible if every ratepayer attempted to run his own British Museum. The same method of civic co-operation which produces roads, drains, street-lighting, parks, policemen, and other necessary adjuncts of modern civilization, is that which also enables libraries, museums, schools and art galleries to be maintained, and provides a degree of democratic equality in the possession of these advantages which could never be gained by the wealth of individuals acting for themselves.

It would be impossible within the limits of this work to discuss the many technicalities connected with library buildings and fittings, especially as this kind of information is already amply given in the different works of Burgoyne,[1], Champneys[2] and Brown[3], but a word may be allowable on the subject of the provision best suited to the needs of comparatively small areas. The Carnegie gifts for libraries have been responsible for a good deal of overbuilding in various parts of the country, and there is generally a temptation to erect much larger institutions than the limited rate of 1d. in the £ will adequately maintain even in cases where no gifts are made. Wrong directions in which money is often spent are the provision of museums, art galleries, lecture rooms, separate rooms for ladies and other departments, which in numerous cases can neither be supported nor supervised. A fair provision for a town with an income of £500 per annum would be a Reference Reading Room and Library, a General Reading Room for magazines, a Lending Library and a Children's Reading Room and Library, with all necessary office, store and staff accommodation. Even this limited of number of departments will tax the resources a small library to the utmost for adequate staff, stock, periodicals and establishment charges. Nevertheless, it is the most necessary accommodation required by all sections of the public. If any cutting down is essential, it can be accomplished by amalgamating the Reference and General Reading Rooms, or separating them merely by means of glazed screens, and so reducing the number of principal departments to three. Quite a serviceable and convenient building can be planned on these lines, to accommodate the necessary books and readers in areas ranging in population from 3,000 to 20,000 people. If Lecture Rooms, Museums or Art Galleries are also provided in addition to the minimum institution suggested, it should only be on the strict understanding that they were revenue-earning and self-supporting departments. If not, then unless some extraordinary source of income can be tapped, such as endowments, the whole institution, in each of its departments, will be crippled, and its work rendered futile. Other directions in which the smaller municipal libraries are very apt to squander precious funds, and so deplete the meagre book-fund, are in the adoption of expensive mechanical methods which are quite out of place in small areas; the over-provision of newspapers; and the tendency to multiply departments of activity—lecture courses, elaborate catalogues, and so on—which cannot be efficiently supported. Several small libraries have been crippled in their public utility by an enthusiastic attempt to rival richer and larger institutions, and the result in such cases is an inevitable depreciation in the interest and support of the people. With these brief warnings, this chapter may fitly be concluded, especially as some further consideration is given to the subject in Chapter X, which deals with Public Service and Rules.


↑ Library Construction. Allen. 1897.

↑ Public Libraries. Batsford. 1907.

↑ Manual of Library Economy. 2nd edition. 1907.


CHAPTER VII

CLASSIFICATION

However small a library may be, it should have its contents arranged according to a systematic classification, assembling as nearly as possible in one place all the books on one subject. The advantages of exact classification extend to every department of a library's work, but to none more than book-selection, shelf arrangement and cataloguing. It has been the custom in the past in a majority of English municipal libraries not to classify the books at all, but merely to arrange them in six or ten broad divisions—A.B.C., etc., and number the books consecutively in each division regardless of topic relationship. The effect of such a plan is simply chaos, and no library so arranged can give full effect to its stores of knowledge or adequately serve its users. In recent years many new and a few of the older large libraries have adopted exact classification, and gradually all others must fall into line. Many good schemes have been devised for the close classification of books on shelves and in catalogues, and each has virtues and advantages of its own. It is manifest that the sum of human knowledge in all its departments and ramifications can be arranged in a variety of ways, and that all kinds of methods of classification can be devised to suit the basis selected, be it supernatural, physical, ethnological, philosophical, historical or other. It will be sufficient for small libraries to start with a complete scheme, fully indexed, which can be applied in a short form, and afterwards expanded to infinity if necessary. Such a scheme exists ready to hand, in the Subject Classification,[1] which was specially compiled for the use of English libraries, and from it is extracted the series of chief divisions, into which most ordinary subjects can be approximately placed. The full tables of this system provide numbered places in logical order for every subject of importance on which literature exists, but it may be thought simpler for small libraries to commence with the less-ambitious condensed table, which provides places for a majority of the subjects represented in books. By marking books with the easy symbols provided, it is possible to assemble in one place most of the books on any particular subject. Thus all cookery books would be marked I9, and al books on Egypt 04. Books on France would be numbered Ro, while everything relating to the Bible would go at Ki. The effect of thus marking a small collection of books would be to assemble all relative main subjects together, and enable any one to find by a simple number where any special subject was kept, because the whole of the books would be arranged in the alphabetical order of the main classes, plus the numerical subdivisions. In a number of cases there might be many books all marked the same thus, six cookery books each by a different author:—

I9 Alden. American Cook-book.

I9 Bowen. Menus for Daily Use.

I9 Garcia. The Chef's Companion.

I9 Miller Common-sense Cookery.

I9 Watts. Comprehensive Dictionary of Cookery.

I9 Zedler. German Kitchen Recipes.

These would be arranged in alphabetical order of authors' names, and a reader having found I9 in its order, would have no difficulty in picking out the particular author wanted. It is possible, however, that some class, say Ro–France, may grow very rapidly, and it might not be convenient to simply provide an author-alphabet, when perhaps some of the books were historical, some topographical, and so on. In these circumstances use can be made of the Qualifying Table added to the Classification Tables, by means of which any topic can be further subdivided, and each subdivision again arranged by authors' names. To show this clearly, an alphabetical list of books on France is here given, and immediately after it, the same books more minutely arranged so as to bring books in the same form together.

R0–France=Author Arrangement.


R0 Belloc. History of France.

R0 Bulwer. Parisian Sketches.

R0 Chapman. The Huguenots in France.

R0 Guizot. History of France.

R0 Kitchen. History of France.

R0 Musgrave. Rambles in Normandy.

R0 Sharp. The Bourbons.

R0 White. Massacre of St. Bartholomew.

R0 Wood. Southern Seaboard of France.

R0 Wright. Enclyclopædia of France.

R0–France=Class Arrangement.


R0 .2 Wright. Encyclopædia of France.

R0 .9 Belloc. History of France.

R0 .9 Chapman. The Huguenots.

R0 .9 Guizot. History of France.

R0 .9 Kitchen. History of France.

R0 .9 Sharp. The Bourbons.

R0 .9 White. Massacre of St. Bartholomew.

R0 .10 Bulwer. Parisian Sketches.

R0 .10 Musgrave. Rambles in Normandy.

R0 .10 Wood. Southern Seaboard of France.


By means of these additional form numbers, each subject can be even more closely classified without complicating the original symbol, or making the notation too long or elaborate. Of course it is perfectly competent for any small library to make use of the full tables of the Subject Classification in which case topics are shown in a much more close and detailed union. France, for example, would have its history divided into general and special periods, places being provided for each reign; while a book like Musgrave's Normandy, R0 .10 would become R230 .33, and thus be clearly differentiated from Paris=R500 and Mediterranean Provinces R335.

When all the books are marked according to the table following, or the fully-indexed tables of the complete Subject Classification, they are arranged on the shelves in order of their alphabetical letters and numbers, and then in each division by authors' names. The library will then be in classified order, all chief topics being in close proximity to related subjects, and each main class or subdivision capable of having insertions made at any point. When a new book is received it is only needful to give it the class letter and number from the tables, and insert it in its author-alphabetical order among the other books on the same subject. Certain classes of literature are most conveniently kept in alphabetical order of authors' names, and these are N0 Fiction, N1 Poetry, N2 Drama and N3 Essays. In the full Subject Classification, only the works of individual novelist poets, etc, could be dealt with in this way, as collective, historical and theoretical and other works on these subjects must receive their own special marks. Individual biography is another class which lends itself best to alphabetical arrangement, but in this case it is the subject, and not the author who is selected for treatment. Smith's Gladstone, Froude’s Carlyle, etc., would arrange at Gladstone and Carlyle, and not at Smith or Froude. The effect of this is to bring all the lives of one particular individual together. Biographies of rulers or monarchs go with the history of the country to which they belong. It is impossible in a sketch such as this to deal more closely with such a large and varied subject as classification, and the following tables must be left to speak for themselves. If the information given already in this chapter should be found inadequate, reference must be made to the fuller works on classification, of which a brief list is given in the appendix.


Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/94 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/95 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/96 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/97 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/98


↑ Library Supply Co. 1906. 15s. net.


CHAPTER VIII

CATALOGUING

A catalogue should be as nearly as possible an index to the classification of the Library. It may be compiled on various methods, but nowadays only three forms are generally used; the Dictionary, or alphabet of authors, titles, subjects, forms, etc., in one sequence; the Classed, in the order of the classification, with brief-entry indexes of topics, authors and titles; and Author catalogue plus subject indexes in separates sequences. The Dictionary catalogue is the most common form, and rules for its compilation are more numerous than for any other kind. A very complete code is that of Mr. C. A. Cutter, an American who did much original and influential work for librarianship. Another work chiefly on dictionary cataloguing is the Manual of Cataloguing by Mr. J. H. Quinn. Codes of rules applicable to all varieties of catalogue have been published by the British Museum, the Bodleian Library, the Library Association, the American Library Association, etc., and a joint-code by the two last-named bodies is in preparation. Most codes for cataloguing err on the side of allowing too many exceptions and alternatives to the general principle of particular rules, and this weakness is discussed in the Manual of Practical Bibliography, pp 47-57, by the present writer. Rules for promoting uniformity of method should not permit of exceptions of any kind, and the person applying them should not be allowed discretionary power to catalogue a book under a heading which strikes him as being preferable to some other form which is also allowed by the code. Such a rule as that which enjoins the use of an author's best-known name is simply ridiculous when critically examined. The rules attached to this chapter are just as necessary for small as for large libraries, and they have the advantage of being brief, compact and rigid. They also claim to be based upon the reasonable and natural principle of regarding family or blood names as the most accurate and proper for cataloguing purposes, especially as they agree with the headings used in most good biographical dictionaries. One of the most surprising anomalies in connexion with library cataloguing is the persistency with which certain librarians cling to the plan of entering living authors under pseudonyms, while ignoring entirely those of older writers. Although it is notorious that Mark Twain is the pseudonym of Samuel L. Clemens, and that baptismal name is printed on all his recent title-pages, there are hundreds of cataloguers who insist upon using Twain as the chief entry, instead of Clemens, with a bare reference from Twain. Yet these same gentlemen will spend hours getting behind some title-page which effectually disguises the subject of a book. For example, an author desires his book to be known as Mental Gymnastics, so that the cataloguer who swears by the title-page would have no option but to enter it at ‘Gymnastics’ as a topic, and ‘Mental’ as a title-entry. Instead of this, he spends considerable time in finding out what the book is really about, and when, finally, he discovers that it is a criticism of the Bacon-Shakespeare controversy, deliberately departs from his title-page standard by entering it at ‘Shakespeare’, with a cross reference from ‘Bacon’! The question remains, therefore, if it is necessary to go behind the declaration of a title-page for subjects, why is it not equally necessary to penetrate all the disguises, and catalogue the author properly as well as his subject? If the answer is that people know the author best by his assumed name, it is then just as logical to assume that they know his subject best by the misleading title used, and uniformly and consistently use only the information given by the title-page. By using the following Rules strictly, very little confusion will result, although some additional labour will have to be taken with the compilation. Readers very soon grasp the idea of real names and quickly learn to look for them only; while the cross reference from the pseudonym or other form of name to the real one is so simple that it need trouble nobody.


RULES FOR THE COMPILATION OF CATALOGUES.


AUTHORSHIP.

1. Surnames. Enter under the surnames of the authors when stated in the books or otherwise ascertained. In all cases, save where varied in the rules following, such surnames are to be the birth-names of the authors, in their vernacular forms. Cross references are to be made in every case from uncommon to common forms of names.

Surnames in English beginning with a prefix (D', De, Du, Le, La, Von, Van, etc.) are to be entered under such prefix. In other languages the prefixes must be ignored, save the French La, Le, Des and Du, which must be used, e.g.; La Fontaine, not Fontaine, La. The word following the prefix must be used, e.g.; Beethoven, Ludwig van, not van Beethoven.

2. Christian or Forenames. Enter Christian names after the surnames and distinguish them by placing them between parentheses, thus—

Smith (William J.).

In cases where an author known only by a second forename, as

William Blanchard Jerrold,

Henry Austin Dobson,


write out in full as above; but pick out the known name in different type, or underline it; and in cases where there are a number of authors of the same name, arrange by the known and ignore the disused forename. Only write out in full the first forename, unless it is a disused one, e.g.—

Smith (Thomas J. W. T.).

3. Distinctions and Titles. Ignore designations like Reverend, Doctor, M.A., LL.D., Professor, Miss, etc., save when required by Rule 4, but note titles or offices which will serve to distinguish an author and indicate his status or authority, e.g.—

Stanley (Arthur P.) Dean.

Keppel (Sir Henry) Admiral.

Macdonald (Sir Hector) General.

Stubbs (William) Bishop.

Jessel (Sir George) Master of the Rolls.

4. Biographical Dates. Use birth and death dates, or other period dates, to distinguish authors of the same name, e.g.—

Smith (William) 1810-1870.

— (William) 1815-1861.

— (William) 1819-1890.

In cases where such means of identification are not available, use their professions or other distinctions, as in Rule 3.

5. Royal and other Dignitaries. Monarchs, Popes, and Princes generally, are to be entered at their ruling names in their vernacular forms, with references from other forms, and from family names, e.g.—

Charles II of Britain.

Stuart. See Charles II.

Gregory VII, Pope.

Hildebrand. See Gregory VII.

6. Noblemen. Enter all noblemen under their birth or family names, with references from their titles, e.g.—

St. John (Henry), Viscount Bolingbroke.

Bolingbroke (Viscount). See St. John (Henry).

Lubbock (Sir John), Baron Avebury.

Avebury (Baron). See Lubbock (Sir John).

7. Ecclesiastical Personages. Archbishops, Bishops, Cardinals, Patriarchs, etc., are to be entered under their family names where known, with references from titles, e.g.—

Magee (William C.) Archbishop.

York, Archbishop of. See Magee, etc.

Ebor, William. See Magee (William C.).

Saints are to be entered under the forenames by which they were canonized, e.g.—

Paul, Saint, not Saint Paul,

with references from family names if considered sufficiently important.

Friars, Abbots, Monkish chroniclers, etc., are to be entered under their forenames, e.g.—

Florence of Worcester, not Worcester, Florence of.


William of Malmesbury, not Malmesbury, William of.

References to be given from local to personal names.

8. Compound Names. All compound names, English, European and Oriental, to be entered under the first word, with references from the second or other words, e.g.—

Baring-Gould (Sabine).

Gould (Sabine Baring-). See Baring-Gould.

Watts-Dunton (Theodore).

Dunton (Theodore Watts-). See Watts-Dunton.

The only exception to this rule is when the first name is ascertained not to be the birth or family name, in which case Rule 1 must be observed.

9. Changed Names. Married women are to be entered under their birth or maiden names, unless they have consistently used their married names on their title-pages, e.g.—

Wood (Mrs. Henry) Ellen Price,

Oliphant (Margaret) M. Wilson,

but

Braddon (Mary E.), not Maxwell (Mrs. John).

Worboise (Emma J.), not Guyton (Mrs. E.).

Hamilton (Margaret), not Mrs. Argles or Mrs. Hungerford.

Palmer (Henrietta E. V.), not Mrs. Stannard or John Strange Winter.


In all cases the married name or names should be added thus—

Palmer (Henrietta E. V.) Mrs. Stannard, John Strange Winter; and the necessary cross references should be made.

10. Joint-Authorship. Enter under the first name mentioned on the title-page and make references from the others, e.g.—

Beaumont (Francis) and John Fletcher.

Fletcher (John) See Beaumont (Francis).

The works of two or more authors published together should be treated as if issued separately, e.g.—

Poetical works of Goldsmith, Gray and Falconer

catalogue as—

Goldsmith (Oliver) Poetical works.

Gray (Thomas) Poetical works.

Falconer (William) Poetical works.

But make also a collective entry thus, if thought desirable—

Goldsmith (O.), Thos. Gray and W. Falconer. Poetical works.

11. Editors, Translators, Commentators. The names of editors and translators of the works of other authors are to be entered as part of the title of such works, with cross references, e.g.—

Burns (Robert) Life and works. Edited by Robert Chambers, revised by William Wallace.

Chambers (Robert). See Burns (Robert).


Wallace (William). See Burns (Robert).

Editors or translators of collections or anthologies, or any work not definitely assigned to a particular author, are to be treated as the authors, e.g.—

Oxenford (John) trans. The Illustrated book of French songs.

Johnston (Peter) ed. The Charters of Kelross Abbey.

Commentators are to be treated as original authors, but a full entry must also be made under the name of the author, work or subject commented upon.

12. Pseudonyms. In conformity with Rule 1, the real names of authors who adopt pseudonyms must be used, with cross references from the assumed or pseudonymous names, e.g.—

Wilson (John) Christopher North. The Isle of Palms.

North (Christopher) See Wilson (John)

Initials, marks or symbols, and phrases, are to form part of the title, and be treated as anonyma e.g.—

Considerations on the late war, by G. W.

Poems, by XXX

Reflections on life, by One who has toiled at the bench.

Where such initials, marks or phrases, have been identified with real names, such real names, must, of course, be used. Cross references may be used in all cases, if thought necessary, between initials, etc., and titles or real names if ascertained.

13. Anonyma. Anonymous works are to be entered under the first word, not an article, with which the title-page begins, save when the authorship is ascertained, in which case Rule 1 applies. In such a case the abbreviation anon. = anonymous, may be used immediately after the title, e.g.—

Smith (John P.) Essay on music. Anon.

14. Governmental, Society, Academic and other Institutional Authorships. The main entries of such publications should be placed under the subject-matter of the report or document, with brief cross references from titles of institutions, towns where situated, and reporters or authors.

The titles of such institutions will be entered as provided by Rule 13. At the subject-heading chosen, the works will be entered under the title of the institution, e.g.—

Education. United States. Report of the Commissioner of Education.

Football. Rules of the Hornsey Football Club.

Mining. Home Office. Reports of H.M. Inspector of Mines.

15. Periodicals and Ephemera. Treat the same as Anonyma, Rule 13, but make cross references from places of publication, if thought desirable, and enter under subjects.


TITLES AND COLOPHONS.

16. Title-pages are to be transcribed exactly as they stand, save that foreign characters may be transliterated, subject to such omissions or additions as may be advisable. Capital letters should only be used after the initial article, if there is one, for first words, and for proper or subject names, e.g.—

The Wonderful adventures of Tom, Dick and Harry in quest of Light;

or

News from Nowhere;

or

Elementary Physics, with a chapter on Astronomy.

Omitted matter, which should only consist of mottoes, redundancies, and words not necessary to a clear understanding of the title, should be indicated by three dots . . . in a group.

Added matter should be placed within square brackets, and should consist of such explanatory matters as dates covered by a history; translations of foreign titles; the original titles of foreign works which have been translated; dates of publication; authors' names, etc., e.g.—

A Little tour in France [1882].

Hugo (Victor). By Order of the king [L'Homme qui rit].


17. Editions. Enter the number of an edition when stated on the title-page or otherwise ascertained. Note also if the copy of the edition is on large paper, l.p.; privately printed, p.p.; a limited edition, in which case give the number of the copy, l.e. 56; and if printed on vellum, vel., silk or other material, e.g.—

Thomson (James). The Seasons. 19th ed., on vel., l.e. 36.

18. Place of Publication. Enter the place of publication in its vernacular form and supply the English name in brackets, e.g.—

Wien [Vienna]. Torino [Turin[.

Omit London, as it occurs so frequently, and let the absence of a place of publication be understood to mean London, unless there is actually no indication of a place, in which case use the abbreviation n.p.=no place of publication.

19. Date of Publication. Enter the year of publication in Arabic numerals, as given on the title-page, but add within brackets the real date if ascertained to be different, e.g. 1905 [1904].

In a series of volumes give the first and last dates, e.g. 1835–64. When no date is given either on the title-page or elsewhere in the book, add an approximate date within square brackets after the letters n.d.=no date, e.g. n.d. [1820]. Such approximate dates can generally be ascertained from prefaces, allusions in the text, the style of the book, its printer or publisher, or from bibliographies. Chronograms may be given in full in very rare books, but otherwise they should be translated into Arabic figures.

20. Imprint. In rare books, when desirable, give full transcripts of colophons; note printers' marks; give publishers' names when they differ from the printer; and note books issued from private presses, like the Kelmscott Press.

DESCRIPTION AND COLLATION.

21. Volumes. State the number of volumes if more than one, e.g. 2 v.

22. Sizes. Indicate the sizes of books in inches or centimetres, measuring the title-page and not the binding. If thought desirable, the symbols fo. (=folio), 4° (=quarto), 8° (=octavo), 12° (=duodecimo), etc., may be used as well, as a rough guide to sizes, e.g. fo. 18, 4°, 10 × 8, etc. For ordinary catalogue purposes it is not necessary to indicate any sizes save folios and quartos, and in such cases the letters F and Q can be used. Watermarks can be ignored, save in very old unpaged books, when a note of their order can be be made.

23. Pagination. Indicate the number of pages in one- volume books only, by giving the full number in Arabic numerals (counting the verso of the last leaf if blank), and distinguishing preliminary matter when separately paged by means of Roman numerals, e.g. pp. xl. + 630.

24. Signatures. In old unpaged books, note the progression of signatures, or failing them, check the catchwords, and give the total number of leaves or pages, e.g. Sig. A–L—90 pp., or simply pp. 105. Imperfections should be noted as—'Wants pp. 61–68,' 'Preface missing,' 'Title-page missing,' and so on.

25. Series. When a book belongs to a series, whether stated on the title, binding or elsewhere, it should be noted in italics, thus—,

Hadden (j. C.) Chopin. 1903 8° pp. xii + 248 Master Musicians.

26. Alphabetical Order of Catalogues. In arranging an alphabetical catalogue adopt the same progression as is found in dictionaries of language, geography, etc. That is, arrange letter by letter, including second words. For example, do not make two sequences of alphabetical order by ignoring second or compound words in this manner—

New Brunswick,

— Caledonia,

— Guinea,


NewvOrleans,

— Testament,

— York,

Newbury,

Newcastle,

Newfoundland,

Newington,

Newry,

but arrange exactly as the names spell out, thus—

Nee Brunswick,

Newbury,

New Caledonia,

Newcastle,

Newfoundland,

New Guinea,

Newington,

New Orleans,

Newry,

New Testament,

New York.

27. Classified Catalogues. Make author entries on slips as shown at end of rule No. 28, and head them with the class mark. A brief author and topic index can then be made on slips, as follows—

Foreman (J.) Philippine Islands P270.IO

Philippine Islands P270.IO

This index can be printed in one sequence of alphabet, or kept separate as 'Author' and 'subject' Indexes. In some libraries it is the practice to keep such indexes to the classification in manuscript form in sheafs or cards.

28. Supplemental Information. Note the following particulars of publication in the order and, if thought desirable, in the abbreviated forms here set down, and also on p. iii—

Illustrations = ill., col. ill.[1]

Portraits = port. or ports.[1]

Maps = maps[1]

Plans = plans[2]

Facsimilies = fac.[2]

Diagrams = dia.

Tables = tab.

Genealogies = gen.

Music = mus.

Memoir = mem.

Glossary = glo.

Bibliography = bib.

ORDER OF ENTRIES


Author.

Title.

Edition.

Place of Publication.

Date of Publication.

Imprint particulars, for old and rare books only.


No. of Volumes, v.

Size. F. Q. or fo. 4°.

Pages. (Signatures of old books to be noted.)

Series.

Illustrations = i., ill., or col. ill.

Portraits = port., or ports.

Maps = ma., maps

Plans = pl., plans.

Facsimiles = f., fac.

Diagrams = d., dia.

Tables = t., tab.

Genealogical Charts = ge., gen.

Music = mu., mus.

Memoir = m., mem.

Glossary = gl., glo.

Bibliography = b., bib.

Additional marks for special books—Bindings, super-libros; Autographs of great owners, book-plates; Reference to printed bibliographical description in other works, e.g. Brunet, Hain, Proctor, etc.; Typography.

Annotation, with analytical or set-out entries, to be included as notes after the title and the particulars as a smaller type note. Class or call numbers to be written at top of slip.

In cataloguing, use ruled slips of paper 5 by 3 inches, and make a separate entry for every book (not volume), beginning with the author's surname in the top left-hand corner as shown in samples below—


Foreman (John). The Philippine Islands: a political, ethnographical, social, and commercial history of the Philippine Archipelago, embracing the whole period of Spanish rule . . . 2nd ed. London: 1906. 2v. 4° ills., maps, bib.


Add number or press mark.

The same slip is used for a classified catalogue, save that it receives the subject mark at the top, thus—

P. 270.10.

Foreman (John). The Philippine Islands, etc.

Example of the same slip with an annotation—

Foreman (John). The Philippine Islands: a political, ethnographical, social, and commercial history of the Philippine Archipelago: embracing the whole period of Spanish rule. 2nd ed. London: 1906. 2v. 4°, illus., maps, bib.

P 270.10


The latter portion of the work deals with the War of Independence the career and personality of Aguinaldo, the insurgent leader, the American Government, religious difficulties, trade and agriculture since the American advent, the coming 'Philippine Assembly', and labour, education, and other questions.

The two principal forms of manuscript catalogue now used are the 'Card' and 'Sheaf' systems, both of which have points of their own. The card system is a series of catalogue entries on single cards, which are stored on their edges in drawers or trays, and kept in order by various mechanical devices, such as rods, blocks, guides, etc. Additions can be made at any point, and the catalogue can be extended indefinitely on the principle of vertical expansion. The drawers or trays are usually kept in cabinets, and with complete sets of alphabetical or other guides, usually cost about 20s. per 1,000 entries. The sheaf system is a catalogue in book form, with single leaves capable of being moved about as required by means of adjustable screw bindings and other devices. These sheaves are usually placed on a shelf, and as each comprises a small division of the alphabet or classification as the case may be, they are easily handled, and hold considerably more than a card catalogue, because both sides of the leaves can be used, and the leaves are much larger than the cards. The cost varies from about 8s. 6d. to 10s. 6d. per 1,000 entries according to the size. For small libraries the sheaf system is probably the most suitable, both on account of its comparative cheapness and the ease with which the public can use it. It is also by far the best form for private libraries, and as it possesses unlimited powers of expansion, it is a library machine of great importance and utility. It is estimated that card catalogues cost about 1d. per 4 entries, while sheaf catalogues cost 1d. for 12 entries, or if both sides of the slips are used, 1d. for 24 entries.


1 2 3 Note imperfections if any. Text illustrations to be noted. This includes note of celebrated illustrator, as ill. by G. Cruikshank.

1 2 Text illustrations to be noted.


CHAPTER IX

BOOK SELECTION


The remarks and suggestions already made on the subject of book-selection throughout this little work render further comment on the theoretical side of the question unnecessary. What will be attempted in this chapter will take the form of a few practical hints, and a series of suggestions in class order of books which may be considered eminently desirable as the foundation stock of a small municipal library. For reasons of space and utility, it is not considered wise to give titles in the case of a large number of works suggested, because any one directed to a subject and an author associated with it can generally contrive to discover who and what is meant. Thus, if the works of Brown, Jones and Robinson are recommended as representative in the subject of costume, there will be little trouble in finding out who is meant, by reference to full catalogues or bibliographies. So with pure literature. It is not necessary to do more than specify the names of Scott, Dickens, Thackeray, Hugo or Dumas in fiction. It will be understood that sets of the works of these novelists are indicated. So with poets and essayists. It is desirable, but not always possible, to provide the principal texts of Greek, Latin, French and German classics, but for economical and other reasons, it is not thought advisable to deal with anything but translations in English of such literature. The same must be said as regards scientific, historical and sociological works. Although many representative books on all kinds of subjects exist in foreign languages, and have never been translated, it would be impossible within the limits of this little book to deal with them.

Assuming, then, that only English literature is contemplated in this survey, or works translated into the English language, the first piece of advice which presents itself is that every library should have its foundations laid on the works of the great writers of all times, whose books and lives are described in histories of literature. This is such a reasonable suggestion, that it might almost be thought to be universal in practice and unnecessary to mention, whereas, the reverse is too often the case. As has been already stated in Chapter VI, a tendency persists, in spite of all that can be said, to buy books in cheap lots, irrespective of their contents, or to what extent they strengthen any section of the library. The reasonableness of the proposal stands forth very prominently when it is considered what any student or reader would be entitled to expect to find in such a selection of books as a public library can provide. His expectations on this head may reasonably be stated as just such writers as those above mentioned, plus a fair proportion of the more ephemeral current literature which has not yet been accorded a settled place in literary history. Thus, a reader is surely entitled to demand some of the works of Homer, Virgil, Dante, Goethe, Shakespeare, Burns, Milton and Rousseau among great names; while he may also reasonably hope to find in the same company such lesser lights in all departments of literature as Gibbon, Sappho, Walt Whitman, Hume, Schopenhauer, Huxley, Longfellow, the Brontës, Boswell, Keats, Lingard, Macaulay, Gilbert White, Izaak Walton and Grant Allen.

If it is not a wise and proper policy to commence with the authors generally recognized and acclaimed as the best in the realms of pure literature, what principle can be adopted as a guide to such an immense labyrinth as the field of general literature? Certainly the individual tastes of librarians and committees are not to be accepted as irreproachable standards, nor can one depend absolutely upon the guidance of experts. It seems fair, therefore, to assume that the suggestion made above, as to depending upon what may be termed the selection of posterity, is not unreasonable, nor one difficult to follow if one or two of the best literary histories are compared and selections carefully made. In these days of good and cheap reprints, most of the world's great classics can now be had in modern editions. Many books can also be obtained second-hand, by circulating lists among booksellers, or by personal inspection of their stocks. It is not wise, as a rule, to buy fiction second-hand, unless sound copies in modern editions can be obtained; but this happens so rarely that no further attention need be bestowed on the question. Science in all its branches is another class which should never be sought in second-hand form, because, as a rule, textbooks and other works of authority are seldom to be picked up secondhand when current, and booksellers usually only report old and in many cases obsolete editions. The classes most likely to be secured advantageously at second-hand are History, Biography, Travel, Theology, Poetry, Philosophy and miscellaneous subjects. Like science, law and social science are constantly changing classes, and it is not often that current editions can be procured at second-hand prices. A list of guides and aids to book-selection is given in the Appendix, so that it is not necessary to do more than refer to them and the following condensed list of authors and titles. From this, any one can compile a brief catalogue of the best books by great authors and on the principal subjects, supplementing it from personal knowledge, and rejecting anything deemed unsuitable. The nucleus of a good small library should be found in this list of suggestions, and although no attempt has been made at completeness in every department, sufficient names have been included to form a good beginning for a representative library in English. As remarked in the Introduction, a title-anthology must from its very nature be a perpetual target for every inquirer, so that it is hoped this will be no exception, if it elicits by way of criticism the names of even more desirable books than some of those included. The matters of prices and publishers’ names have been omitted to save space, but as a rule any work in print can be found by the average bookseller, while a reference to some of the bibliographies mentioned in the Appendix will usually enable older books to be traced.

NUCLEUS LIST OF AUTHORS AND SUBJECTS FOR A SMALL MUNICIPAL LIBRARY.


[To use this list it will be necessary to consult the bibliographical works noted in the Appendix, such as Sonnenschein, Robertson, Greenwood, etc., which will enable authors to be identified.]

Generalia.


A0—Generalia.

Encyclopædia—

Chambers.

Recipes—

Cooley,

Leland.

Scientific American.

Spon.

A1—Education.

Arnold (M.).

Bain.

Barnett.

Cassell.

Dawson.

Fitch.

Froebel.

Hamerton.

Herbart.

Locke.

Pestalozzi.

Rousseau.

Ruskin.

Smiles.

Spencer.

Thring.

A3—Logic.

Bain.

Fowler.

Jevons.

Mill.

Ryland.

Whately.

A4—Mathematics.

Hall and Knight.

Hall and Stevens.

Jackson.

Lock.

Mitchell.

Nixon.

Pendlebury.

Pitman.


Smith.

Sonnenschein.

Stern.

Todhunter.

Workman.

A5—Geometry.

Angel.

Barnard and Child.

Godfrey and Siddons.

Hall and Stevens

Hinton.

Smith.

Todhunter.

A6—Graphic and Plastic Arts.

Clausen.

Collier.

Conway.

Crane.

Day.

Harper.

Hatton.

Hind.

Lanteri.

Machwhirter.

Morris.

Pennell.

Reynolds.

Ruskin.

Slater.

Sturgis.

Thompson.

Wyllie.

Photography—

Abney.

Bolas.

Brothers.

Hinton.

Holland.

Lund.

A9—General Science.

Brown (R.).

Buckley.

Huxley.

Mivart.

Pearson.

Proctor.

Tyndall.

Physical Science.


B0—Physics, Dynamics.

Faraday.

Ganot.

Glazebrook.

Lockyer.

Maxwell.

Roscoe.

Rutherford.

Stewart.

Tait.

Thomson.

Watson.

B1—Mechanical Engineering, Machinery.

Goodeve.

Hasluck.

Lukin.

Rankine.

B2—Civil Engineering.

Fletcher.

Greenwell,

Mahan.

Rankine.

B3—Architecture.

Adams.

Blomfield.

Crouch and Butler.

Fergusson.

Fletcher (B.).

Leaning.

Middleton.

Mitchell.

Parker.

Pugin.


Rosengarten.

Ruskin.

Statham.

Sturgis.

B5—Railways, Vehicles.

Acworth

Bury and Hillier.

Findlay.

Gordon.

Graves.

Grinling.

MacDermott.

Philipson.

Young.

B6—Transport, Shipbuilding, Shipping.

Allsop.

Bullen.

Crotch.

Dana.

Eichorn.

Firth.

Galton.

Hall.

Herbert.

Sennett.

Wilson-Barker.

B8—Naval and Military Science.

Baden-Powell.

Castle.

Goodenough.

Hardy.

Hutchinson.

Hutton.

Melville.

Wyndham.

C0—Electricity.

Allsop.

Bottone.

Harrison.

Henderson.

Lodge.

Maxwell.

Maycock.

Parr.

Slingo and Brooker.

Stewart.

Thompson.

Thomson.

C1—Optics.

Brewster.

Cross and Cole.

Glazebrook.

Lockyer.

Roscoe.

Stokes.

Tyndall.

C2—Heat, Steam Engine.

Cooke.

Donkin.

Edser].

Ewing.

Grover.

Hood.

Hovenden.

Jamieson.

Maxwell.

Perry.

Stewart.

Tait.

C3—Acoustics.

Helmholtz.

Mayer.

Rayleigh.

Tyndall.

C4—Music.

Banister.

Bridge.

Crowest.

Cummings.

Curwen.

Davey.


Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/126 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/127 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/128 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/129 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/130 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/131 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/132 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/133 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/134 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/135 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/136 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/137 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/138 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/139 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/140 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/141 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/142 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/143 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/144 T5—Denmark

Otté.

Russell-Jeaffreson.

Weitemeyer.

T6—Norway.

Boyeson.

Carlyle.

Du Chaillu.

T8—Sweden.

Bain.

Voltaire.

Woods.

British Islands.

U0—Ireland.

Froude.

Gannon.

Joyce.

Lawless.

Lecky.

MacCarthy.

Maxwell (W. H.).

O'Curry.

O'Grady.

Thackeray.

Walpole.

Young.

U2—Wales.

Baring-Gould.

Borrow.

Bradley.

Edwards.

Rhys and Brynmor-Jones.

U3—England.

Bede.

Besant.

Bright.

Buckle.

Carlyle.

Clarendon.

Creighton.

Elton.

Freeman.

Froude.

Gairdner.

Gardiner.

Geoffrey of Monmouth.

Green.

——— (Mrs.).

Grevill.

Gross.

Hume.

Knight.

Lecky.

Lingard.

Low and Pulling.

MacCarthy.

Martineau.

Molesworth.

Ranke.

Stubbs.

Timbs.

Traill.

Walpole.

Wheatley.

Yonge.

Desrciption—

Baring-Gould.

Bell's Cathedral ser. besant.

Cobbett.

Ditchfield.

Geikie.

Harper.

Highways and Byways ser.

Hissey.

Howitt.

Loftie.

Meiklejohn.

Palmer.

Snell.

Suffling.

Sutcliffe.

Walford.


Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/146 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/147 Cobbett.

Cobden.

Cockburn.

Columbus.

Comenius.

Cruikshank.

Dante.

Darwin.

Defoe.

Dumas.

Edward, Thos.

Erasmus.

Evelyn.

Faraday.

Franklin, B.

—— Sir J.

Frith.

Garibaldi.

Gladstone.

Gocthe.

Gordon.

Guthrie.

Havelock.

Hawker.

Homer.

Hume.

Hunt.

Irving.

Jefferies.

Jeffrey.

Joan of Arc.

Johnson.

Kingsley.

Knox.

Kossuth.

Lamb.

Livingstone.

Luther.

Macaulay.

Mahomet.

Mazzini.

Mendelssohn.

Miller, Hugh.

Milton.

Morris (Wm.).

Nasmyth.

Nelson.

Newman.

Newton.

Palmerston.

Pasteur.

Peel.

Pepys.

Pitt.

Rossetti.

Rousseau.

Ruskin.

Schumann.

Scott.

Shakespeare.

Shelley.

Socrates.

Spencer.

Stanley.

Stevenson.

Stowe.

Tennyson.

Thoreau.

Trollope.

Turner.

Voltaire.

Wagner.

Wallace, Sir W.

Watt, Jas.

Wellington.

Wesley.

Williams (Montagu).

Wordsworth.

Series—

English Men of Letters.

English Men of Action.

Eminent Women.

Great Educators.

Great Writers.


CHAPTER X

PUBLIC SERVICE AND RULES

The Rules and general arrangements made for readers in small municipal libraries should be as liberal and unrestrictive as may be considered consistent with efficiency and safety. In recent years a strong reaction has set in against the prison-like rules and conditions which governed the early public libraries, and in this country, the United States, the British colonies, and also in various parts of Europe, the tendency is all in favour of making libraries efficient every day workshops rather than bonded stores. Access to libraries is now rendered easy for everybody; age limits have been reduced; the borrowing right has been greatly extended, both as regards the number of books allowed at one time and the method of enrolment; while direct access to the shelves, which is the rule in most reference libraries, is also being extended to lending departments. All these, together with the adoption of exact classification and annotated cataloguing seem to distinguish modern from the older librarianship, which was more or less based on distrust of the public, and a failure to grasp the Public Service and Rules educational significance of well-selected collections of books. To be thoroughly successful, a municipal library should be staffed by educated and intelligent officers, trained specially for the work; and with the aid of a broad-minded committee, they can make the institution first in value to the inhabitants. The public library is practically the only department through which a municipality comes into direct and unrestrained contact with the people, and it is, therefore, the institution most likely to be criticized and consequently the one most requiring constant supervision. This fact has been recognized more generally in the larger provincial towns than in London, where there still exists a strong feeling that in some way libraries are a costly delusion, and an encouragement to the spread of socialism! In the great cities of the north quite a different spirit is abroad, and so far from starving and cutting down the public libraries, every effort is made to foster and extend their activities. Indeed, most of the large towns have obtained special parliamentary powers, with the consent of the ratepayers, for raising or removing the limitation of the rate of one penny in the pound, and the result has been to improve the public service all round.

Before setting out a series of draft Rules to serve as a basis for a code, some practical points affecting the public service in libraries may be considered. In news or reading rooms it is best on the whole to assign a fixed place for every periodical, and to classify the magazines so as to bring together all the related trade, art, literary, scientific and other miscellanies. By confining the daily newspaper element to one good London paper like the Times, and the local journals, considerable economies can be effected by which money is released for the purchase of the higher-class magazines. In the Reference Department much good will result from placing on open shelves, accessible to all without formalities, a selection of quick-reference books like encyclopædias, dictionaries, year-books, directories, histories, atlases, gazetteers and similar works. These can be used without any preliminary filling up of application forms, and the privilege will attract hundreds of readers to the library who otherwise might not come. Open access to shelves on the British Museum plan is undoubtedly much appreciated, and is now in operation nearly everywhere. By this method quick-reference books are placed on open shelves, while very valuable and little used books are applied for in the usual way, either on written application or demand. In the Lending Department it is desirable to make the choice of books as easy and satisfactory as possible, and for this reason, elaborate mechanical devices for registering the issues of books and indicating them 'in' and 'out' are absolutely unnecessary. It is absurd to find municipal libraries in small towns fitted up with a huge rampart of indicator for the purpose of recording a daily issue of about 50 to 100 volumes. It is like employing a steam engine to sharpen one pencil!

Even in larger libraries with daily issues amounting on an average to 300 or 500 a day, it is unwise to use indicators for any class of books save fiction. A library with a rapidly growing stock, which employs an indicator for all classes of books, is certain to reach a point where further expansion of the indicator is impossible, and then great difficulties are introduced. It should always be remembered that non-fiction forms about 70 per cent to 75 per cent of the total stock, but that it is not issued in the lending library to a greater extent than about 30 per cent to 35 per cent.; consequently it is wrong to add a constantly growing but little used apparatus to the equipment, when it is more likely to prove an obstruction than an aid as regards nearly three-fourths of the stock and work. An indicator for fiction only, plus a card-charging system in a busy lending library, is a reasonable compromise, but in small libraries a good card-charging system is infinitely more economical and satisfactory. There are plenty of simple and accurate card-charging systems on the market for recording the issues of books and enabling them to be traced at any moment, and these can be seen at any library outfitters. These card-registration systems are very rapid in operation, and when worked in conjunction with open shelves, furnish a perfect and satisfactory method of book issue and record. The public in general take more interest in libraries and the books they contain, when allowed direct access to closely classified shelves, there to examine before selecting literature. It is an education for a man who wants a book on ferns to go to a series of book shelves and find displayed the whole literature of botany, arranged in logical order, and thus obtain in five minutes a better conception of his own subject and its relationships, than could be got by hours of study in a catalogue. The effect of access to the shelves has a tendency to convert mere 'readers' into students, and to introduce to notice hundreds of good books which would otherwise remain unknown. This latter fact can easily be ascertained by comparing the issue labels of certain historical, biographical and scientific works in an open and closed library. In the former case such works are generally dated to show frequent issues, while in the latter the issues recorded are either few in number or non-existent. There are other practical details of modern library practice, but these must be sought for in the special works noted in the Appendix. With these remarks, the following draft Rules are submitted as a series of suggestions for the compilation of codes suitable for small municipal libraries. Anything which does not suit local circumstances can be omitted, as hours and conditions must be fixed accordingly.

[Draft.]

RULES AND REGULATIONS.

General.


1.—The Library of . . . is a society established for purposes of literature and science exclusively. The Librarian shall have the general charge of the library, and shall be responsible for the safe keeping of the books and for all the property belonging thereto.


2.—The library is supported in part by a rate levied in accordance with the Public Libraries Acts and in part by voluntary contributions of money and gifts of books, periodicals, etc. The Library Committee shall not make any dividend, gift, division, or bonus in money unto or between any of its members.

3.—Admission is free to all public parts of the library during the hours when it is open, but no person shall be admitted who is disorderly, uncleanly, or in a state of intoxication. Smoking, betting, and loud conversation or other objectionable practices are also forbidden in the rooms or passages of the library.

4.—The Librarian shall have power to suspend the use of the ticket of any borrower, and refuse books or deny the use of the reading rooms to any reader who shall neglect to comply with any of these rules and regulations, such reader having the right of appeal to the Library Committee, who shall also decide all other disputes between readers and the library officials.

5.—Readers desirous of proposing books for addition to the library may do so by entering the titles and particulars of publication of such books on slips provided for the purpose, which will then be submitted to the Committee at their first meeting thereafter. All suggestions on management to be written on slips or sent by letter to the Committee.

6.—Any person who unlawfully or maliciously destroys or damages any book, map, print, manuscript, or other article belonging to the libraries shall be liable to prosecution for misdemeanour under the provisions of 24 and 25 Vict. c. 97, 'An Act to consolidate and amend the statute law of England and Ireland relating to malicious injuries to property, 1861,' the provisions of the statute entitled 61 and 62 Vict c. 53. 'An Act to provide for the punishment of offences in libraries, 1898,' shall also apply.

Reference Library.


7.—The Reference Library shall remain open on weekdays from 10 a. m. till p. m., but shall be closed on Christmas Day, Good Friday, and such other days as the Committee may from time to time appoint.


8.—Any person over the age of 16 and such others as the Librarian may permit may use the reference library, and on entering shall sign his or her name, with the correct address, in a book kept for the purpose. Any one giving a false name or address shall be liable to prosecution, and shall not afterwards be allowed to use the library.

9.—Every person before leaving the room shall return the book or books consulted into the hands of the Librarian or his assistants, and must not replace books taken from the open shelves, but leave them with the assistant at the exit.

10.—Any work in the lending department, if not in use, excepting fiction, may be had on application at the reference library counter for perusal in the reading room, but on no account must such books be taken from the room.

11.—Illustrations of all kinds may be copied, but not traced, save by permission of the Librarian. Extracts from books may be copied in pencil. The use of ink is only permitted at certain tables which are reserved for the purpose. Certain works are only issued after a written application to the Library Committee.

Lending Department.


12.—The lending library is open daily for the issue and receipt of books every week-day from 10 a.m. till . . . p.m., but shall be closed on Sundays, Christmas Day, Good Friday, all public holidays, and such other days as the Committee may from time to time appoint.

13.—Books shall be borrowed for home reading only by persons rated, resident, or employed in . . .

14.—All persons whose names appear on the current Register of Electors of . . . or in the local directories as residents, or who can produce a receipt for current rates, may borrow books on their own responsibility, after filling up the application forms provided for the purpose.

15.—Other residents and non-resident employees in over 14 years of age may borrow books, but must first obtain a recommendation from a duly qualified person as defined in Rule 14, and must sign the necessary application forms provided for the purpose. The filling up and signing of these forms will be regarded as an assent to these rules and regulations, and an undertaking to observe due care in the use of the books, and to make good any loss or damage sustained.

16.—Any person resident or employed in . . . able to obtain the recommendation of a qualified person as defined in Rule 14, may borrow books on leaving a deposit of five shillings with the Librarian. The guarantee of the recognized head officials of Government Departments, Friendly Societies, and similar organizations may be accepted at the discretion of the Committee, in lieu of an ordinary guarantee, for persons who are employed in . . .

17.—The application forms, duly signed, must be delivered to the Librarian or his assistant, and if on examination they are found to comply with the rules and regulations, tickets will be issued at once [or after three days interval]. These tickets must be revised and stamped annually by the assistants to ensure the correctness of the addresses and other particulars [or must be renewed annually at the date of expiry].

18.—The Committee shall issue additional tickets to readers, available for all classes of literature save fiction. Any duly enrolled borrower may have one of these extra tickets on filling up an application form as for an ordinary ticket. School teachers in . . . may have more than one ticket of this class on application to the Librarian.

19.—Borrowers must return each volume lent within fifteen days, including days of issue and return, and shall be liable to a fine of 1d. per week or portion of a week for each volume lent, if not returned within that period, but the issue of a book may be renewed for a further period of fifteen days, dating from the day of intimation, on notice being given to the Librarian either personally or in writing, and no further renewal will be allowed if the book is required by another reader. Books which are much in demand may, however, be refused such renewal at the discretion of the Librarian.


20.—Borrowers who are unable to obtain a particular non-fictional book and desire that it shall be retained for them on its return, must give its title, number, etc., to the assistant, and pay 1d. to cover cost of posting an intimation that it is available for issue, but no book will be kept longer than the time mentioned in the notice sent. Novels cannot be reserved under this rule.

21.—No person shall take out of any library any book for use in any house in which there is a person suffering from infectious disease, and no person shall return to any such library any book which has been exposed to infection from any infectious disease, but shall at once give notice to the Medical Officer of Health that it has been exposed to infection, and leave the book at the office of the Medical Officer of Health or hand it over to any Sanitary Inspector acting on his behalf, who shall cause the same to be disinfected and then returned to the library, or destroyed.

22.—Borrowers leaving the district or ceasing to use the library are required to return their tickets to the Librarian in order to have them cancelled, and changes of address should be notified at once.

Reading Rooms.


23.—The Reading Rooms shall remain open on weekdays from 9 a.m, till 10 p.m., but certain newspaper advertisements shall be on view from . . . a.m. The department shall be closed on the usual holidays as stated in Rule 12.

24.—No persons under 14 years of age, unless accompanied by their parents or elders capable of controlling them, shall be allowed to use these rooms except by permission of the Librarian or his assistants.

25.—Any persons who use these rooms for purposes of betting, or who in any way cause obstruction or disorder in these or any other rooms or passages of the libraries, are liable to be proceeded against under the provisions of 61 and 62 Vict. c. 53. 'An Act to provide for the punishment of offences in libraries, 1898.'

26.—Readers in possession of periodicals must be prepared to resign them to any other reader who may ask to peruse them, ten minutes after the request has been made through one of the library staff.

Children's Rooms.


27.—The Children's Reading Rooms and Libraries shall be open from 4.30 till 8 p.m. daily, from Monday to Friday inclusive, and from 10 a.m. till 5.30 p.m. on Saturdays.

28.—The Children's Lending Libraries are free to every boy and girl under 14 years of age residing in . . . able to write and read; but they must obtain a recommendation from their parents or school teachers as to their good behaviour and the safe return of all books. Only one book a week will be issued to each Borrower, but books may be returned any day.

29.—The Children's Reading Room shall only be open to children over 10 years of age who possess tickets of admission issued by the Librarian on the recommendation of parents or school teachers.

By Order.


APPENDIX

SELECT LIST OF WORKS ON BIBLIOGRAPHY, BOOK SELECTION AND LIBRARY ADMINISTRATION.


GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.


Brown (J. Duff). Annotated Syllabus for the Systematic Study of Librarianship. 1904.

—— Manual of Library Economy. 1907.

Champneys (A. L.). Public Libraries, a Treatise on their Design, Arrangement and Fittings. 1907.

Clark (J. W.). The Care of Books. Cambridge, 1901.

Cockerell (D.). Bookbinding and the Care of Books. 1907.

Greenwood's Library Year-books to 1901. O.P.

Roebuck and Thorne. Primer of Library Practice for Junior Assistants. 1904.

Professional Periodicals:— Library. London. In progress.

Library Assistant. London. In progress.

Library Association Record. London. In progress.

Library World. London. In progress.

Library Journal. New York. In progress.

Public Libraries. Chicago. In progress.


CLASSIFICATION.


Brown (J. Duff). Manual of Library Classification and Shelf Arrangement. 1898.

—— Subject Classification. 1906.

Dewey (M.). Abridged Decimal Classification. Chicago. 1894.

Richardson (E. C.). Classification, Theoretical and Practical. New York. 1901.


CATALOGUING.


Crawford (E.). Cataloging: Suggestions for the Small Public Library. 1906.

Cutter (C. A.). Rules for a Dictionary Catalogue. Washington. 1904.

Dewey (M.). Library School Rules for Catalogues. New York. 1898.

Hitchler (T.). Cataloging for Small Libraries. New York. 1905.

Quinn (J. H.). Manual of Library Cataloguing. 1899.

Savage (E. A.). Manual of Descriptive Annotation. 1906.


LITERARY HISTORY AND BOOK SELECTION.


Adams (C. K.) A Manual of Historical Literature.... 3rd ed. New York. 1888.

Baker (E. A.). A Descriptive Guide to the best Fiction. 1903.

—— A Guide to the best Historical Novels and Tales. 1907.

Catalog of 'A.L.A.' Library. Washington. 1905.

English Catalogue of Books. Published annually.

Dunlop (J. C.). History of Fiction, ed. Wilson. 1888. 2 vols.

Greenwood (E.). Classified Guide to Technical and Commercial Books, 1904.

Hallam (H.). Introduction to the Literature of Europe. Reprint. 1882.

Iles (G.) ed. Annotated Bibliography of Fine Art. Boston. 1897.

Kroeger (A. B.). Guide to the Study and Use of Reference Books. Boston, 1902.

Leypoldt and Iles. List of Books for Girls and Women and their Clubs. Boston, 1895.

Magnus (L.). How to read English Literature. 1906. 2 vols.

Nicoll and Seccombe. The Bookman History of English Literature. 1905-6.

Nield (J.) A Guide to the best Historical Novels and Tales. 1904.

Patrick (D.) ed. Chambers' Cyclopædia of English Literature. 1901-3. 3 vols.

Reference Catalogue of Current Literature. Issued every few years.

Robertson (J. M.). Courses of Study. 1904.

Sonnenschein (W. S.). The Best Books. 1887-1901. Various editions.

—— The Reader's Guide to Contemporary Literature. 1895-1901.

Histories of the national literature of England, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, Spain, Holland, Hungary, Greece, Rome, Arabia, China, United States, Scandinavia, etc.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


British Museum. Guide to the Exhibits in the King's Library. Last edition.

Brown (J. Duff). Manual of Practical Bibliography. 1906.

Burton (J. H.). The Book-hunter. Edinburgh, 1885.

Duff (E. G.). Early Printed Books, 1893.

Horne (R. H.). An Introduction to the Study of Bibliography. 1814. O.P.

Plomer (H. R.). A Short History of English Printing. 1900.

Pollard (A. W.). Early Illustrated Books. 1893.

Rawlings (G. B.). The Story of Books. 1901.

Stein (H.). Manuel de bibliographie générale. Paris. 1898.


INDEX

Access to libraries, 139

to shelves, 141

Age standards for reading, 14

Alphabetical order, 102

American children's libraries, 12

Anecdote books, 44

Annotations, 105

Anonyma, 98

Army libraries, 53

Art galleries, 77

Arts, (home library) 39, (juvenile) 68, (class) 84, 113-4

Assistants in libraries, 140

Authors, great, 110

Authorship, 92

joint, 96

Authors' names, 90, 92-8

Avebury's "Best books', 37


Baby books, 11, 20

Bedroom libraries, 30

Best books, 37

Bibliographics, 2, 149

Bibliography, list of books, 152

Bibliotheca Latrina, 44

Biography, exemplary, 17

(home library) 41, (juvenile) 63, 69, (class) 87, 137

shelf order, 83

Book-buying, 112

selection, 1, 71, 109, et passim, (guides) 150.

sizes, 101

Books for municipal libraries, 113

for very young children, 20

lists of 'best', 37

Brain standards for reading, 14

Buildings for small libraries, 76

Burton, John Hill, 2

Business libraries, 47, 53


Card indexing, 48, 106

Carroll's 'Alice' books

Catalogue, card, 48, 106

classed 89 103

dictionary, 89

entries, order, 104

rules, 89, 92 (code)

sheaf, 107

Cataloguing, 89-107, 150

Children's home library, nucleus, 18

libraries, 11, 18 , 20

reading rooms, 148

Christian names, 92

Classed catalogues, 89, 103

Classification, 79-88, 149

of children, 14

Colophons, 99


Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/163 Page:The small library. A guide to the collection and care of books (IA smalllibraryguid00browiala).pdf/164


About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

MarkLSteadman

Feydey

Pokechu22

Hilohello

Inductiveload

Chrisguise

Ciridae

Eievie

CalendulaAsteraceae

ShakespeareFan00

MadeAt126AM

Beardo

Simon Peter Hughes

~2026-19906-84

1015Delle

M-le-mot-dit

Sp1nd01

Rocket000

Boris23

KABALINI

Bromskloss

Tene~commonswiki

AzaToth

Bender235

PatríciaR
